ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS 27 ITEM 4. MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES N/A INFORMATION ABOUT OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICERS 27 PART II 29 ITEM 5. MARKET FOR THE COMPANY’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF EQUITY SECURITIES 29 ITEM 6. [RESERVED] 29 ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS 30 ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK 49 ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA 50 ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE 103 ITEM 9A. CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES 104 ITEM 9B. OTHER INFORMATION 107 ITEM 9C. DISCLOSURE REGARDING FOREIGN JURISDICTIONS THAT PREVENT INSPECTIONS N/A PART III 107 ITEM 10. DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 107 ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION 107 ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND MANAGEMENT AND RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS 107 ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE 107 ITEM 14. PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTING FEES AND SERVICES 107 PART IV 107 ITEM 15. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES 107 15(a)(1) Financial Statements 107 15(a)(2) Financial Statement Schedules 108 15(a)(3) Exhibits 108 ITEM 16. FORM 10-K SUMMARY 111 SIGNATURES 111 N/A = Not Applicable DEFINED TERMS Unless the context requires otherwise, references to “Pfizer,” “the Company,” “we,” “us” or “our” in this Form 10-K (defined below) refer to Pfizer Inc. and its subsidiaries. For each year presented, Pfizer’s fiscal year-end for subsidiaries operating outside the U.S. is as of and for the year ended November 30 and for U.S. subsidiaries is as of and for the year ended December 31. References to “Notes” in this Form 10-K are to the Notes to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in this Form 10-K. We also have used several other terms in this Form 10-K, most of which are explained or defined below: * Indicates calculation not meaningful or results are greater than 100% Form 10-K This Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2025 2024 Form 10-K Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2024 340B Program 340B Drug Pricing Program 3SBio 3SBio, Inc. and its subsidiaries Shenyang Sunshine Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. and 3S Guojian Pharmaceutical (Shanghai) Co., Ltd. Proxy Statement Proxy Statement for the 2026 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, which will be filed no later than 120 days after December 31, 2025 AbbVie AbbVie Inc. Abingworth Abingworth LLP ABO Accumulated benefit obligation; represents the present value of the benefit obligation earned through the end of the year but does not factor in future compensation increases ACIP Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices ADC Antibody-Drug Conjugate AI artificial intelligence Alexion Alexion Pharma International Operations Limited, a subsidiary of AstraZeneca PLC ALK anaplastic lymphoma kinase Alliance revenues Revenues from alliance agreements under which we co-promote products discovered or developed by other companies or us Arvinas Arvinas, Inc. Astellas Astellas Pharma Inc., Astellas US LLC and Astellas Pharma US, Inc. ATTR-CM transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy BioNTech BioNTech SE Biopharma Global Biopharmaceuticals Business Blackstone Blackstone Life Sciences BLA Biologics License Application BMS Bristol-Myers Squibb Company BOD Board of Directors CDC U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention cGMP current Good Manufacturing Practices CMMI Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation CMS Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services CODM Chief Operating Decision Maker Comirnaty Unless otherwise noted, refers to, as applicable, the current formulation of Comirnaty (COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA) 2025-2026 Formula as well as all prior authorized or approved formulations of the vaccine, which was first authorized in the U.S. during December 2020 pursuant to an EUA COVID-19 novel coronavirus disease of 2019 DEA U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency Developed Markets Includes, but is not limited to, the following markets: Western Europe, Japan, Central Europe, Canada, Scandinavian countries, Australia, certain Eastern European countries, South Korea, Finland and New Zealand DMD Duchenne muscular dystrophy EC European Commission EMA European Medicines Agency Emerging Markets Includes, but is not limited to, the following markets: Asia (excluding Japan and South Korea), Latin America, Eastern Europe (excluding the Balkans and certain other countries), Africa, the Middle East and Turkey EPS earnings per share EU European Union EUA emergency use authorization Exchange Act Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended FASB Financial Accounting Standards Board FCPA U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act FDA U.S. Food and Drug Administration FFDCA U.S. Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act GAAP U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles GDFV grant-date fair value Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K i Genmab Genmab A/S GILTI (NCTI) Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (renamed Net Controlled Foreign Corporation (CFC) Tested Income (NCTI) for taxable years starting after December 31, 2025) GSK GSK plc Haleon Haleon plc HHS U.S. Department of Health and Human Services HIPAA Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 Hospira Hospira, Inc. HRR homologous recombination repair IPR&D in-process research and development IRA Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 IRC Internal Revenue Code IRS U.S. Internal Revenue Service IT information technology JV joint venture King King Pharmaceuticals LLC (formerly King Pharmaceuticals, Inc.) mCC metastatic cervical cancer MCO managed care organization mCRC metastatic colorectal cancer mCRPC metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer mCSPC metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer MD&A Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations MDL Multi-District Litigation MDPNP Medicare Drug Price Negotiation Program MDRP Medicaid Drug Rebate Program Medicare Part B a medical insurance plan that helps cover medically necessary services, outpatient care, and preventative services for people with Medicare Medicare Part D a prescription drug coverage program for people with Medicare Meridian Meridian Medical Technologies, Inc. Metsera Metsera, Inc. Moody’s Moody’s Ratings (formerly Moody’s Investors Service) mRNA messenger ribonucleic acid MSA Manufacturing Supply Agreement Mylan Mylan N.V. NAV net asset value NDA New Drug Application Nimbus Nimbus Therapeutics, LLC nmCRPC non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer nmCSPC non-metastatic castration-sensitive prostate cancer NSCLC non-small cell lung cancer NYSE New York Stock Exchange OBBBA One Big Beautiful Bill Act ODT oral disintegrating tablet Ono Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. OTC over-the-counter Paxlovid (a) an oral COVID-19 treatment (nirmatrelvir tablets and ritonavir tablets) PBM pharmacy benefit manager PBO Projected benefit obligation; represents the present value of the benefit obligation earned through the end of the year and factors in future compensation increases PC1 Pfizer CentreOne PGS Pfizer Global Supply Pharmacia Pharmacia LLC (formerly Pharmacia Corporation) PIE Pfizer Investment Enterprises Pte. Ltd. (a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of Pfizer) PP&E Property, plant and equipment Pierre Fabre Pierre Fabre Medicament SAS PNIF Pfizer Netherlands International Finance B.V. (a wholly-owned finance subsidiary of Pfizer) PRAC Pharmacovigilance Risk Assessment Committee Prevnar family Includes Prevnar 20/Prevenar 20 (pediatric and adult) and Prevnar 13/Prevenar 13 (pediatric and adult) PsA psoriatic arthritis Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K ii QCE quality consistency evaluation RA rheumatoid arthritis R&D research and development ROU right of use RSV respiratory syncytial virus S&P S&P Global (formerly Standard & Poor’s) SCD sickle cell disease Seagen Seagen Inc. and its subsidiaries SEC U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission SI&A Selling, informational and administrative expenses SNS Strategic National Stockpile SMPS Sumitomo Pharma Switzerland GMBH Takeda Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited Tax Cuts and Jobs Act or TCJA Legislation commonly referred to as the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 TSAs transition service arrangements UC ulcerative colitis U.K. United Kingdom Upjohn Business Pfizer’s former global, primarily off-patent branded and generics business, which included a portfolio of 20 globally recognized solid oral dose brands, including Lipitor, Lyrica, Norvasc, Celebrex and Viagra, as well as a U.S.-based generics platform, Greenstone, that was spun-off on November 16, 2020 and combined with Mylan to create Viatris U.S. United States VBP volume-based procurement Viatris Viatris Inc. ViiV ViiV Healthcare Limited Vyndaqel family Includes Vyndaqel, Vyndamax and Vynmac WHO World Health Organization WTO World Trade Organization Wyeth Wyeth LLC (formerly Wyeth) YaoPharma YaoPharma Co., Ltd. (a) Paxlovid has not been approved, but has been authorized for emergency use by the FDA under an EUA for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 in pediatric patients (12 years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg) who are at high risk for progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization or death. The emergency use of Paxlovid is only authorized for the duration of the declaration that circumstances exist justifying the authorization of emergency use of the medical product during the COVID-19 pandemic under Section 564(b)(1) of the U.S. Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act, 21 U.S.C. § 360bbb-3(b)(1) unless the declaration is terminated or authorization revoked sooner. Please see the EUA Fact Sheet at www.covid19oralrx.com . This Form 10-K includes discussion of certain clinical studies relating to various in-line products and/or product candidates. These studies typically are part of a larger body of clinical data relating to such products or product candidates, and the discussion herein should be considered in the context of the larger body of data. In addition, clinical trial data are subject to differing interpretations, and, even when we view data as sufficient to support the safety and/or efficacy of a product candidate or a new indication for an in-line product, regulatory authorities may not share our views and may require additional data or may deny approval altogether. Some amounts in this Form 10-K may not add due to rounding. All percentages have been calculated using unrounded amounts. All trademarks mentioned are the property of their owners. AVAILABLE INFORMATION Our website is www.pfizer.com . This Form 10-K, our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, our Current Reports on Form 8-K and our proxy statements, and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, are, or will be, available (free of charge) on our website, in text format and, where applicable, in interactive data file format , as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file this material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. Throughout this Form 10-K, we “incorporate by reference” certain information from other documents filed or to be filed with the SEC, including our Proxy Statement. Please refer to this information. This Form 10-K will be available on our website on or about February 26, 2026. Our Proxy Statement will be available on our website on or about March 12, 2026. Our annual Impact Report, which provides disclosures regarding our responsible business practices, is made available on our website. Information in our Impact Report is not incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K. We may use our website as a means of disclosing material information and for complying with our disclosure obligations under Regulation Fair Disclosure promulgated by the SEC. These disclosures are included on our website in the “About—Investors” or “Newsroom” sections. Accordingly, investors should monitor these portions of our website, in addition to following our press releases, SEC filings, public conference calls and webcasts, as well as our social media channels (our Facebook page, Instagram account (@Pfizerinc), YouTube page, LinkedIn page, and X (formerly known as Twitter) accounts (@Pfizer and @Pfizer_News)). The information contained on our website, our Facebook, Instagram, YouTube and LinkedIn pages or our X (formerly known as Twitter) accounts, or any third-party website, is not incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K. Information relating to corporate governance at Pfizer, including our Corporate Governance Principles; Director Qualification Standards; Pfizer Policies on Business Conduct (for all of our employees, including our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Principal Accounting Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K iii Officer); Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Members of the Board of Directors; information concerning our Directors; ways to communicate by e-mail with our Directors; information concerning our Board Committees; Committee Charters; Charter of the Lead Independent Director; and transactions in Pfizer securities by Directors and Officers are available on our website. We will provide any of the foregoing information without charge upon written request to our Corporate Secretary, Pfizer Inc., 66 Hudson Boulevard East, New York, NY 10001-2192. We will disclose any future amendments to, or waivers from, provisions of the Pfizer Policies on Business Conduct affecting our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Principal Accounting Officer and executive officers on our website as promptly as practicable, as may be required under applicable SEC and NYSE rules. Information relating to shareholder services, including the Computershare Investment Program, book-entry share ownership and direct deposit of dividends, is also available on our website. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K iv FORWARD-LOOKING INFORMATION AND FACTORS THAT MAY AFFECT FUTURE RESULTS This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. We also provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release to the public, as well as public oral statements. Given their forward-looking nature, these statements involve substantial risks, uncertainties and potentially inaccurate assumptions. These statements may be identified by using words such as “will,” “may,” “could,” “likely,” “ongoing,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “expect,” “project,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “assume,” “target,” “forecast,” “guidance,” “goal,” “objective,” “aim,” “seek,” “potential,” “hope” and other words and terms of similar meaning or by using future dates. We include forward-looking information in our discussion of the following, among other topics: • our anticipated operating and financial performance, including financial guidance and projections; • reorganizations, business plans, strategy, goals and prospects; • expectations for our product pipeline (including products from completed or anticipated acquisitions), in-line products and product candidates, including anticipated regulatory submissions, data read-outs, study starts, approvals, launches, discontinuations, clinical trial results and other developing data; revenue contribution and projections; pricing and reimbursement; market dynamics, including demand, market size and utilization rates; and growth, performance, timing and duration of exclusivity and potential benefits; • strategic reviews, leverage and capital allocation objectives, dividends and share repurchases; • plans for and prospects of our acquisitions, dispositions and other business development activities, and our ability to successfully capitalize on growth opportunities and prospects; • sales, expenses, interest rates, foreign exchange rates and the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings; • expectations regarding the impact of or changes to existing or new government regulations, laws or policies; • our ability to anticipate and respond to and our expectations regarding the impact of macroeconomic, geopolitical, health and industry trends, pandemics, acts of war and other large-scale crises; and • manufacturing and product supply. In particular, forward-looking information in this Form 10-K includes statements relating to specific future actions, performance and effects, including, among others, the expected benefits of the organizational changes to our operations; our anticipated operating and financial performance, as well as our key priorities; our expectations regarding the impact of COVID-19 on our business, operations and financial results; the expected revenue, seasonality of demand and phasing for certain of our products; expected patent terms; the expected impact of patent expiries and generic and biosimilar competition; the expected pricing pressures on our products and the anticipated impact to our business; the expected impact of the IRA Medicare Part D Redesign; the benefits expected from our business development transactions, including, among others, our acquisitions of Metsera and Seagen and our in-licensing agreements with 3SBio and YaoPharma; the availability of raw materials; our efforts to develop plans to help mitigate the impact, and potential impact, of tariffs and pricing dynamics on our business and operations; our anticipated cash flows and liquidity position; the anticipated costs, savings and potential benefits from certain of our initiatives, including our enterprise-wide Realigning Our Cost Base Program and our Manufacturing Optimization Program to reduce our cost of goods sold; our voluntary agreement with the U.S. Government designed to lower drug costs for U.S. patients and to include certain Pfizer products on the TrumpRx.gov platform, Pfizer’s plans to further invest in U.S. manufacturing and potential tariff impacts; our expectations regarding product supply; our greenhouse gas reduction goals and our expectations regarding environmental costs and expenditures; our planned capital spending; our capital allocation framework; expectations regarding our pension plans; and expectations regarding legal proceedings and compliance with existing and anticipated laws and regulations. Given their nature, we cannot assure that any potential outcome expressed in these forward-looking statements will be realized in whole or in part. Actual outcomes may vary materially from past results and those anticipated, estimated, implied or projected. These forward-looking statements may be affected by underlying assumptions that may prove inaccurate or incomplete, or by known or unknown risks and uncertainties, including those described in this section, in the Item 1A. Risk Factors section or in MD&A. Therefore, you are cautioned not to unduly rely on forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this Form 10-K. We undertake no obligation to update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable securities law. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects. Some of the factors that could cause actual results to differ are identified below, as well as those discussed in the Item 1A. Risk Factors section and within MD&A. We note these factors for investors as permitted by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. The occurrence of any of the risks identified below, in the Item 1A. Risk Factors section, or within MD&A, or other risks currently unknown, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition or results of operations, or we may be required to increase our accruals for contingencies. It is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties: Risks Related to Our Business, Industry and Operations, and Business Development: • the outcome of R&D activities, including the ability to meet anticipated pre-clinical or clinical endpoints, commencement and/or completion dates for our pre-clinical or clinical trials, regulatory submission dates, and/or regulatory approval and/or launch dates; the possibility of unfavorable pre-clinical and clinical trial results, including the possibility of unfavorable new pre-clinical or clinical data and further analyses of existing pre-clinical or clinical data; risks associated with preliminary, early stage or interim data; the risk that pre-clinical and clinical trial data are subject to differing interpretations and assessments, including during the peer review/publication process, in the scientific community generally, and by regulatory authorities; whether and when additional data from our pipeline programs will be published in scientific journal publications, and if so, when and with what modifications and interpretations; and uncertainties regarding the future development of our product candidates, including whether or when our product candidates will advance to future studies or phases of development or whether or when regulatory applications may be filed for any of our product candidates, including as a result of clinical trial data or regulatory decisions or feedback that could impact the future development of our product candidates, including our vaccine candidates such as our next generation pneumococcal conjugate vaccine candidate; • our ability to successfully address comments received from regulatory authorities such as the FDA or the EMA, or obtain approval for new products and indications from regulators on a timely basis or at all; Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 1 • regulatory decisions impacting labeling, approval or authorization, including the scope of indicated patient populations, product dosage, manufacturing processes, safety and/or other matters, including decisions relating to developments regarding potential product impurities; uncertainties regarding the ability to obtain or maintain, and the scope of, recommendations by technical or advisory committees, and the timing of, and ability to obtain, pricing/reimbursement, approvals and product launches, all of which could impact the availability or commercial potential of our products and product candidates; • claims and concerns that may arise regarding the safety or efficacy of in-line products and product candidates, including claims and concerns that may arise from the conduct or outcome of post-approval clinical trials, pharmacovigilance or Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategies, which could impact marketing approval, product labeling, and/or availability or commercial potential; • the success and impact of external business development activities, such as the November 2025 acquisition of Metsera, as well as risks and uncertainties related to the ability to identify and execute on potential business development opportunities; the ability to satisfy the conditions to closing of announced transactions in the anticipated time frame or at all, including the possibility that such transactions do not close; the ability to realize the anticipated benefits of any such transactions in the anticipated time frame or at all; the potential need for and impact of additional equity or debt financing to pursue these opportunities, which has in the past and could in the future result in increased leverage and/or a downgrade of our credit ratings and could limit our ability to obtain future financing; challenges integrating the businesses and operations; disruption to business or operations relationships; risks related to achieving or growing revenues for certain acquired or partnered products; significant transaction costs; and unknown liabilities; • competition, including from new product entrants, in-line branded products, generic products, private label products, biosimilars and product candidates that treat or prevent diseases and conditions similar to those treated or intended to be prevented by our in-line products and product candidates; • the ability to successfully market both new and existing products, including biosimilars; • difficulties or delays in manufacturing, sales or marketing; supply disruptions, shortages or stock-outs at our facilities or third-party facilities that we rely on; and legal or regulatory actions; • the impact of public health outbreaks, epidemics or pandemics on our business, operations and financial condition and results, including impacts on our employees, manufacturing, supply chain, sales and marketing, R&D and clinical trials; • risks and uncertainties related to Comirnaty and Paxlovid or any potential future COVID-19 vaccines, treatments or combinations, including, among others, the risk that as the market for COVID-19 products remains endemic and seasonal and/or COVID-19 infection rates do not follow prior patterns, demand for our COVID-19 products has and may continue to be reduced or not meet expectations, which has in the past and may continue to lead to reduced revenues, excess inventory or other unanticipated charges; risks related to our ability to develop, receive regulatory approval for, and commercialize variant adapted vaccines, combinations and/or treatments; uncertainties related to recommendations and coverage for, and the public’s adherence to, vaccines, boosters, treatments or combinations, including uncertainties related to the potential impact of narrowing recommended patient populations; whether or when our EUAs or biologics licenses will expire, terminate or be revoked; risks related to our ability to accurately predict or achieve our revenue forecasts for Comirnaty and Paxlovid or any potential future COVID-19 vaccines or treatments; and potential third-party royalties or other claims related to Comirnaty and Paxlovid; • trends toward managed care and healthcare cost containment, and our ability to obtain or maintain timely or adequate pricing or favorable formulary placement for our products; • interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, including the impact of global trade tensions, as well as currency devaluations and monetary policy actions in countries experiencing high inflation or deflation rates; • any significant issues involving our largest wholesale distributors or government customers, which account for a substantial portion of our revenues; • the impact of the increased presence of counterfeit medicines, vaccines or other products in the pharmaceutical supply chain; • any significant issues related to the outsourcing of certain operational and staff functions to third parties; • any significant issues related to our JVs and other third-party business arrangements, including modifications or disputes related to supply agreements or other contracts with customers including governments or other payors; • uncertainties related to general economic, political, business, industry, regulatory and market conditions including, without limitation, uncertainties related to the impact on us, our customers, suppliers and lenders and counterparties to our foreign-exchange and interest-rate agreements of challenging global economic conditions, such as inflation or interest rate fluctuations, and changes in global financial markets; • the exposure of our operations globally to possible capital and exchange controls, economic conditions, expropriation, sanctions, tariffs and/or other restrictive government actions, changes in intellectual property legal protections and remedies, unstable governments and legal systems and inter-governmental disputes; • risks and uncertainties related to issued or future executive orders or other new, or changes in, laws, regulations or policy regarding tariffs or other trade or foreign policy and/or the impact of any potential U.S. Governmental shutdowns, including impacts on governmental agencies due to a shutdown; • the risk and impact of tariffs on our business, which is subject to a number of factors including, but not limited to, restrictions on trade, the effective date and duration of such tariffs, countries included in the scope of tariffs, changes to amounts of tariffs, and potential retaliatory tariffs or other retaliatory actions imposed by other countries; • the impact of disruptions related to climate change and natural disasters; • any changes in business, political and economic conditions due to actual or threatened terrorist activity, geopolitical instability, political or civil unrest or military action and the resulting economic or other consequences; • the impact of product recalls, withdrawals and other unusual items, including uncertainties related to regulator-directed risk evaluations and assessments, such as our ongoing evaluation of our product portfolio for the potential presence or formation of nitrosamines , and our voluntary withdrawal of all lots of Oxbryta in all markets where it is approved and any regulatory or other impact on Oxbryta and other sickle cell disease assets; • trade buying patterns; • the risk of an impairment charge related to our intangible assets, goodwill or equity-method investments; Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 2 • the impact of, and risks and uncertainties related to, restructurings and internal reorganizations, as well as any other corporate strategic initiatives and growth strategies, and cost-reduction and productivity initiatives, including any potential future phases, each of which requires upfront costs but may fail to yield anticipated benefits and may result in unexpected costs, organizational disruption, adverse effects on employee morale, retention issues or other unintended consequences; • the ability to successfully achieve our climate-related goals and progress our environmental and other sustainability priorities; Risks Related to Government Regulation and Legal Proceedings : • the impact of any U.S. healthcare reform or legislation, including executive orders or other change in laws, regulations or policy, or any significant spending reduction or cost control efforts affecting Medicare, Medicaid, the 340B Program or other publicly funded or subsidized health programs, including the IRA and the IRA Medicare Part D Redesign, government cuts to Affordable Care Act (ACA) subsidies, or changes in the tax treatment of employer-sponsored health insurance that may be implemented; • risks and uncertainties related to the impact of Pfizer’s voluntary agreement with the U.S. Government designed to lower drug costs for U.S. patients and to include certain Pfizer products on the TrumpRx.gov platform, Pfizer’s plans to further invest in U.S. manufacturing and potential tariff impacts, including risks relating to entering into binding final agreements with the U.S. Government; • U.S. federal or state legislation or regulatory action and/or policy efforts affecting, among other things, pharmaceutical product pricing, including international reference pricing (including Most-Favored-Nation drug pricing), intellectual property, product approval processes and pathways, reimbursement or access to or recommendations for our medicines and vaccines, tax changes or other restrictions on U.S. direct-to-consumer advertising; limitations on interactions with healthcare professionals and other industry stakeholders; as well as pricing pressures for our products as a result of highly competitive biopharmaceutical markets; • risks and uncertainties related to changes to vaccine or other healthcare policy in the U.S., including: (i) risks and uncertainties relating to the evolving vaccine landscape; and (ii) the FDA's recently adopted policy of disclosing Complete Response Letters for unapproved drug candidates and the attendant risk of disclosure of trade secrets or confidential commercial information; • legislation or regulatory action and/or policy efforts in markets outside of the U.S., such as China or Europe, including, without limitation, laws related to pharmaceutical product pricing, intellectual property, medical regulation, environmental protections, data protection and cybersecurity, reimbursement or access, including, in particular, continued government-mandated reductions in prices and access restrictions for certain products to control costs in those markets; • legal defense costs, insurance expenses, settlement costs and contingencies, including without limitation, those related to legal proceedings and actual or alleged environmental contamination; • the risk and impact of an adverse decision or settlement and risk related to the adequacy of reserves related to legal proceedings; • the risk and impact of tax related litigation and investigations; • governmental laws, regulations and policies affecting our operations, including, without limitation, the IRA, as well as changes in such laws, regulations or policies, or their interpretation, including, among others, new or changes in tariffs, tax laws and regulations internationally and in the U.S., including the OBBBA, which was enacted on July 4, 2025, and is still subject to further guidance; the adoption of global minimum taxation requirements outside the U.S. generally effective in most jurisdictions since January 1, 2024, government cost-cutting measures and related impacts on, among other matters, government staffing, resources and ability to timely review and process regulatory or other submissions; restrictions related to certain data transfers, including data security, data localization and cross border data transfer regulations, and transactions involving certain countries; and potential changes to existing tax laws, tariffs, or changes to other laws, regulations or policies in the U.S., including by the U.S. Presidential administration and Congress, as well as in other countries; Risks Related to Intellectual Property, Technology and Cybersecurity: • the risk that our currently pending or future patent applications may not be granted on a timely basis or at all, or any patent-term extensions that we seek may not be granted on a timely basis, if at all; • risks to our products, patents and other intellectual property, such as: (i) claims of invalidity that could result in loss of patent coverage; (ii) claims of patent infringement, including asserted and/or unasserted intellectual property claims; (iii) claims we may assert against intellectual property rights held by third parties; (iv) challenges faced by our collaboration or licensing partners to the validity of their patent rights; or (v) any pressure from, or legal or regulatory action by, various stakeholders or governments that could potentially result in us not seeking intellectual property protection or agreeing not to enforce or being restricted from enforcing intellectual property rights related to our products; • any significant breakdown or interruption of our IT systems and infrastructure (including cloud services); • any business disruption, theft of confidential or proprietary information, security threats on facilities or infrastructure, extortion or integrity compromise resulting from a cyber-attack, which may include those using adversarial AI techniques, or other malfeasance by, but not limited to, nation states, employees, business partners or others; and • risks and challenges related to the use of software, systems and services that include AI-based functionality and other emerging technologies. PART I ITEM 1. BUSINESS ABOUT PFIZER Pfizer Inc. is a research-based, global biopharmaceutical company. We apply science and our global resources to bring therapies to people that extend and significantly improve their lives through the discovery, development, manufacture, marketing, sale and distribution of Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 3 biopharmaceutical products worldwide. We work across developed and emerging markets to advance wellness, prevention, treatments and cures that challenge the most feared diseases of our time. We collaborate with healthcare providers, governments and local communities to support and expand access to reliable, affordable healthcare around the world. The Company was incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware on June 2, 1942. Most of our revenues come from the manufacture and sale of biopharmaceutical products. We believe that our medicines and vaccines provide significant value for healthcare providers and patients through improved treatment of diseases and improvements in health, wellness and productivity as well as by reducing other healthcare costs, such as emergency room visits or hospitalizations. We seek to enhance the value of our medicines and vaccines and actively engage in dialogues about how we can best work with patients, physicians and payors to prevent and treat disease and improve outcomes. We seek to maximize patient access and evaluate our pricing arrangements and contracting methods with payors to minimize adverse impact on our revenues within the current legal and pricing structures. We are committed to fulfilling our purpose: Breakthroughs that change patients’ lives . Our purpose fuels everything we do and reflects both our passion for science and our commitment to patients. As a science-driven global biopharmaceutical company, we remain focused on advancing our product pipeline, supporting our marketed brands and deploying capital responsibly, with a focus on initiatives that can help contribute to our long-term revenue and future growth. Our 2026 key priorities are: 1. Maximize value of key transactions 2. Deliver on critical R&D milestones 3. Invest to maximize post-2028 growth 4. Scale AI across our business. We are committed to strategically capitalizing on growth opportunities, primarily by advancing our own product pipeline and maximizing the value of our existing products, but also through various business development activities. We view our business development activity as an enabler of our strategies and seek to generate growth by pursuing opportunities and transactions that have the potential to strengthen our business and our capabilities. We assess our business, assets and scientific capabilities/portfolio as part of our regular, ongoing portfolio review process and also continue to consider business development activities that will help advance our business strategy. For a discussion of our strategy and our business development initiatives, including our acquisitions of Metsera in November 2025 and Seagen in December 2023 and our in-licensing agreements with YaoPharma and 3SBio entered into in 2025 in the obesity and cardiometabolic diseases and oncology therapeutic areas, see the Overview of Our Performance, Operating Environment, Strategy and Outlook section within MD&A and Note 2 . In addition, we are scaling AI across R&D, manufacturing, commercial and patient engagement to improve productivity and accelerate innovation. COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS We manage our commercial operations through a global structure consisting of three operating segments, each led by a single manager: Biopharma, PC1 and Pfizer Ignite. Biopharma, our innovative science-based biopharmaceutical business, is engaged in the discovery, development, manufacture, marketing, sale and distribution of biopharmaceutical products worldwide. PC1 is our contract development and manufacturing organization and a leading supplier of specialty active pharmaceutical ingredients. Pfizer Ignite is an offering that provides strategic guidance and end-to-end R&D services to select innovative biotech companies that align with our R&D focus areas. In 2025, Pfizer made the decision to discontinue Pfizer Ignite and we are winding down this business while collaborating closely with our Ignite partners to ensure continuity and the successful transition of work. Biopharma is the only reportable segment. Within our Biopharma reportable segment, our commercial divisions market, sell and distribute our products, and global operating functions are responsible for the research, development, manufacturing and supply of our products. The commercial structure within our Biopharma reportable segment in 2025 was composed of the Pfizer U.S. Commercial Division, which focused on the commercialization of Pfizer’s entire product portfolio in the U.S., and the Pfizer International Commercial Division, which focused on the commercialization of Pfizer’s entire product portfolio in all international markets. As part of our continued focus on commercial execution, at the beginning of 2026, we made changes in our commercial structure, which included the transition of certain off-patent branded and generic sterile injectables and biosimilars from the Specialty Care and Oncology product portfolios to a new Global Hospital and Biosimilars organization within our Biopharma reportable segment. Effective January 1, 2026, the commercial structure within our Biopharma reportable segment is as follows: Division Description Pfizer U.S. Commercial Includes the U.S. commercial organization covering Pfizer’s entire product portfolio except for the Global Hospital and Biosimilars organization, as well as the Global Access & Value, Global Chief Marketing Office and Primary Care and Specialty Care U.S. Medical Affairs organizations. Pfizer International Commercial Includes the ex-U.S. commercial and medical affairs organizations covering Pfizer’s entire product portfolio in all international markets except for the Global Hospital and Biosimilars organization in certain international markets. Global Hospital and Biosimilars Includes the commercial organization covering Pfizer’s product portfolio of off-patent branded and generic sterile injectables and biosimilars except in China, Hong Kong and certain other international markets. Customer groups and select products within the Biopharma product portfolio in 2026 include: • Primary Care: ◦ Internal medicine product portfolio including in cardiovascular metabolic diseases – select products include: Eliquis, as well as other brands that have experienced patent-based expirations or loss of regulatory exclusivity. ◦ Migraine product portfolio: Nurtec ODT/Vydura and Zavzpret. ◦ Vaccines product portfolio across all ages – select products include: the Prevnar family, Comirnaty, Abrysvo, FSME/IMMUN-TicoVac, Nimenrix and Trumenba. ◦ Treatment for COVID-19: Paxlovid. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 4 • Specialty Care: ◦ Inflammation & immunology product portfolio – select products include: Xeljanz, Enbrel (outside the U.S. and Canada), Cibinqo, Litfulo, Eucrisa and Velsipity. ◦ Rare disease product portfolio for a number of therapeutic areas with rare diseases, including amyloidosis, hemophilia and endocrine diseases – select products include: the Vyndaqel family, Genotropin, BeneFIX, Xyntha, Somavert, Ngenla and Hympavzi. ◦ Certain anti-infective and immunoglobulin medicines – select products include: Zavicefta (outside the U.S. and Canada), Octagam and Panzyga. • Oncology: ◦ Innovative oncology product portfolio of ADCs, small molecules, bispecifics and other immunotherapies that treat a wide range of cancers including certain types of breast cancer, genitourinary cancer and hematologic malignancies, as well as certain types of melanoma, gastrointestinal, gynecological and lung cancer – select products include: Ibrance, Xtandi, Padcev, Adcetris, Inlyta, Lorbrena, Bosulif, Tukysa, Braftovi, Mektovi, Orgovyx, Elrexfio, Tivdak and Talzenna. • Hospital and Biosimilars: ◦ Product portfolio of off-patent branded and generic sterile injectables, oncology biosimilars and biosimilars for chronic immune and inflammatory diseases – select products include : Biosimilars – Inflectra, Oncology biosimilars such as Retacrit, Ruxience, Zirabev, Trazimera and Nivestym, and other biosimilars; and Sterile Injectables – Sulperazon (outside the U.S. and Canada), Atgam, Fragmin, Solu Medrol, Solu Cortef and Bicillin. For additional information on our operating segments and products, including product revenues, see Note 17 , and for additional information on the key operational revenue drivers of our business, see the Analysis of the Consolidated Statements of Operations section within MD&A. For a discussion of the risks associated with our dependence on certain of our major products, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors—Concentration section. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT R&D is at the heart of fulfilling our purpose to deliver breakthroughs that change patients’ lives as we work to translate advanced science and technologies into the medicines and vaccines that may be the most impactful for patients. In addition to discovering and developing new products, our R&D efforts seek to add value to our existing products by improving their safety, efficacy and ease of dosing and by discovering potential new indications. Our R&D Priorities and Strategy. Our R&D priorities include: • delivering a pipeline of highly differentiated medicines and vaccines where we have a unique opportunity to bring the most important new therapies to patients in need; • advancing our capabilities that can position us for long-term R&D leadership; and • advancing new models for partnerships with creativity, flexibility and urgency to deliver innovation to patients as quickly as possible. To that end, our R&D primarily focuses on our main therapeutic areas, which are oncology, internal medicine (including cardiometabolic, weight management and migraine), vaccines (with a pipeline focus on infectious diseases with significant unmet medical need) and inflammation and immunology. While a significant portion of our R&D is internal, we also seek promising chemical and biological lead molecules and innovative technologies developed by others to incorporate into our discovery and development processes or projects, as well as our portfolio. We do so by entering into collaboration, alliance and license agreements with universities, biotechnology companies and other firms as well as through acquisitions and investments, including co-funding agreements with third-parties . These arrangements allow us to share knowledge, risk and cost. They also enable us to access external scientific and technological expertise, as well as provide us the opportunity to advance our own products and in-licensed or acquired products. For information on certain of these collaborations, alliances and license arrangements and investments, see Note 2 . Our R&D Operations. In 2025, we continued to enhance our global R&D operations and pursued strategies to improve R&D productivity and advance a sustainable and value-creating pipeline. We manage our R&D operations for all therapeutic areas in a single R&D organization led by the Chief Scientific Officer and President, Research and Development. This organization is responsible for overseeing all R&D activities with end-to-end responsibilities that span from discovery to late-phase clinical development and post-approval activities, including facilitating regulatory submissions, engaging with health authorities and global medical strategies, as well as U.S. Oncology medical affairs. We continue to evaluate how our simplified structure and sharpened focus might lead to improvements in productivity and potential efficiencies. For example, approximately $500 million of R&D savings achieved from our ongoing realigning our cost base program in 2025 is expected to be reinvested in R&D programs in 2026. See the Costs and Expenses––Restructuring Charges and Other Costs Associated with Acquisitions and Cost-Reduction/Productivity Initiatives section within MD&A for more information . We manage R&D operations on a total-company basis through the organization described above. The Portfolio Management Team (PMT), chaired by our Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer, Executive Vice President, is accountable for aligning resources across R&D, and for helping to ensure optimal capital allocation across the R&D portfolio. We believe that this approach also serves to maximize accountability and flexibility. We do not disaggregate total R&D expense by development phase or by therapeutic area since, as described above, we manage our R&D strategy and operations collectively under the governance of the PMT and do not manage our R&D operational spend independently by development phase or by therapeutic area. Further, as we are able to adjust a significant portion of our spending quickly, we believe that any prior-period information about R&D expense by development phase or by therapeutic area would not necessarily be representative of future spending. For additional information on our R&D operations, including R&D related costs and expenses, see the Costs and Expenses — Research and Development Expenses section within MD&A and Note 17 . Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 5 Our R&D Pipeline. The process of drug, vaccine and biological product discovery from initiation through development and to potential regulatory approval is lengthy and can take more than ten years. As of February 3, 2026, we had the following number of projects in various stages of R&D: Development of a single compound is often pursued as part of multiple programs. While our product candidates may or may not receive regulatory approval, new candidates entering clinical development phases are the foundation for future products. Information concerning several of our drug, vaccine and biological candidates in development, as well as supplemental filings for existing products, is set forth in the Product Developments section within MD&A. The discovery and development of drugs, vaccines and biological products are time consuming, costly and unpredictable. For information on the risks associated with R&D, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors—Research and Development section. COLLABORATION AND CO-PROMOTION AGREEMENTS We use collaboration and/or co-promotion arrangements to enhance our R&D, sales and distribution of certain biopharmaceutical products, which include, among others, the following: • Comirnaty is an mRNA-based coronavirus vaccine to help prevent COVID-19, which is jointly developed and commercialized with BioNTech. Pfizer and BioNTech equally share the costs of development for the Comirnaty program. We also share gross profits equally from commercialization of Comirnaty (excluding mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, where we do not have rights), subject to regulatory authorizations or approvals market by market. For discussion on Comirnaty, see the Overview of Our Performance, Operating Environment, Strategy and Outlook—COVID-19 section within MD&A. • Eliquis (apixaban) is part of the novel oral anticoagulant market and was jointly developed and is commercialized with BMS as an alternative treatment option to warfarin in appropriate patients. We fund between 50% and 60% of all development costs depending on the study, and profits and losses are shared equally except in certain countries where we commercialize Eliquis and pay a percentage of net sales to BMS. In certain smaller markets we have full commercialization rights and BMS supplies the product to us at cost plus a percentage of the net sales to end-customers. • Xtandi (enzalutamide) is an androgen receptor inhibitor that blocks multiple steps in the androgen receptor signaling pathway within tumor cells that is being developed and commercialized in collaboration with Astellas, which has exclusive commercialization rights for Xtandi outside the U.S. We share equally in the gross profits and losses related to U.S. net sales and also share equally all Xtandi commercialization costs attributable to the U.S. market, subject to certain exceptions. In addition, we share certain development and other collaboration expenses. For international net sales we receive royalties based on a tiered percentage. • Orgovyx (relugolix) is an oral gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) receptor antagonist for the treatment of adult patients with advanced prostate cancer that is being developed and commercialized with SMPS. The companies equally share profits and allowable expenses in the U.S. for Orgovyx. Pfizer does not have rights outside of this market. Separately, in December 2024, the companies terminated their collaboration with respect to the relugolix combination tablet. • Padcev (enfortumab vedotin-ejfv) is a first-in-class ADC that is directed to Nectin-4, a protein located on the surface of cells and highly expressed in bladder cancer, that is being co-developed and jointly commercialized with Astellas. In the U.S., Padcev has been approved for use with pembrolizumab for adult patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer and for adult patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) who are ineligible for cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. Other approvals and indications for Padcev vary by market. In the U.S., Pfizer and Astellas jointly promote, and we record net sales and are responsible for all U.S. distribution activities for Padcev. The companies each bear the costs of their own sales organizations in the U.S., and equally share certain other costs associated with commercializing and any profits realized for Padcev in the U.S. Outside the U.S., we have commercialization rights in all countries in North and South America, and Astellas has commercialization rights in the rest of the world. The agreement between us and Astellas provides that the companies will effectively equally share in profits realized in markets outside of the U.S. through: (i) a costs-incurred and profit-sharing mechanism based on product sales and costs of commercialization in certain markets and (ii) a royalty-payment mechanism intended to approximate an equal profit share for both parties in the remaining markets. • Adcetris (bren tuximab vedotin) is being developed and commercialized in collaboration with Takeda. Pfizer has commercialization rights for Adcetris in the U.S. and its territories and in Canada. Takeda has commercialization rights in the rest of the world and pays Pfizer a royalty based on a percentage of Takeda’s net sales of Adcetris in its licensed territories, based on annual net sales tiers. • Tivdak (tisotumab vedotin-tftv) is commercialized in collaboration with Genmab. Pfizer has co-promotion rights in the U.S. Outside the U.S., Genmab has the sole right to promote Tivdak for second-line plus mCC and has co-promotion rights for other indications in all territories except certain territories where Zai Lab Limited (Zai Lab) has commercialization rights (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan). Our profit sharing rights, royalty rights and expense obligations relating to Tivdak vary by jurisdiction. In addition, we have collaboration and/or co-promotion arrangements with respect to certain other biopharmaceutical products. Revenues associated with thes e arrangements are included in Alliance revenues (except in certain markets where we have direct sales and except for the majority of revenues for Comirnaty and Padcev, which are included in Product revenues ). In addition, we have collaboration arrangements for the development and commercialization of certain pipeline products that are in development stage, including, among others certain of those described in the Product Developments section within MD&A. For further discussion of collaboration and co-promotion agreements, see the Item 1. Business—Patents and Other Intellectual Property Rights section , the Item 1A. Risk Factors—Collaborations and Other Relationships with Third Parties section and Notes 2 and 17 . Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 6 INTERNATIONAL OPERATIONS Our operations are conducted globally, and we supply our medicines and vaccines to approximately 200 countries and territories. Emerging markets are an important component of our strategy for global leadership, and our commercial structure recognizes that the demographics and rising economic power of the fastest-growing emerging markets are becoming more closely aligned with the profile found within developed markets. Urbanization and the rise of the middle class in emerging markets provide potential growth opportunities for our products. Revenues from operations outside the U.S. of $25.5 billion, $24.9 billion and $31.4 billion accounted for 41%, 39% and 53% of Total revenues in 2025, 2024 and 2023, respectively. Revenues exceeded $500 million in each of 12, 11 and 14 countries outside the U.S. in 2025, 2024 and 2023, respectively. As a percentage of Total revenues , China was our largest market outside the U.S. in 2025 and 2024 (representing 5% and 4% of total revenues, respectively), and Japan was our largest market in 2023 (representing 6% of total revenues). For a geographic breakdown of Total revenues , see the Total Revenues by Geography section within MD&A and Note 17B . Our international operations are subject to risks inherent in carrying on business in other countries. See the Item 1A. Risk Factors — Global Operations and Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints sections. SALES AND MARKETING Our prescription biopharmaceutical products are sold principally to wholesalers, but we also sell directly to retailers, hospitals, clinics, government agencies and pharmacies. Our vaccines in the U.S. are primarily sold directly to the federal government (including the CDC), wholesalers, individual provider offices, retail pharmacies and integrated delivery systems. Our vaccines outside the U.S. are primarily sold to government and non-government institutions. Certain of these government contracts may be renegotiated or terminated at the discretion of a government entity. For more information, see Note 1G and Not e 17 C . We also seek to gain access for our products on formularies, which are lists of approved medicines available to members of healthcare programs or PBMs in the U.S. Insurers and PBMs who design and negotiate formularies on their behalf use various benefit designs, such as tiered co-pays for formulary products, to drive utilization of products in preferred formulary positions, typically in exchange for a discount off the price of the medicine in the form of a rebate agreement. We may also work with payors on disease management programs that help to develop tools and materials to educate patients and physicians on key disease areas. For information on our significant customers, see Note 17C . We promote our products to healthcare providers and patients consistent with applicable laws, regulations and policies. Through our marketing organizations, we explain the approved uses, benefits and risks of our products to healthcare providers and patients and, in the U.S., to MCOs that provide insurance coverage, such as hospitals, integrated delivery systems, PBMs and health plans; and employers and government agencies who hire MCOs to provide health benefits to their employees. In the U.S. and select international markets, we market directly to consumers through direct-to-consumer advertising that seeks to communicate the approved uses, benefits and risks of our products while motivating people to have meaningful conversations with their doctors. In addition, we sponsor general advertising to educate the public on disease awareness, prevention and wellness, important public health issues and our patient assistance programs. Further, pursuant to our voluntary agreement with the U.S. government, we are participating on the TrumpRx.gov platform, which allows U.S. patients to purchase certain medicines at significant discounts to current retail prices. As part of our commitment to engaging our customers in a manner they prefer, we take an omnichannel approach, including both virtual and in person interactions, and see generally positive customer response to both approaches. PATENTS AND OTHER INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS Patents . We own or have co-promotion and/or license rights related to a number of patents covering pharmaceutical and other products, their uses, formulations, and product manufacturing processes. Patents for individual products extend for varying periods according to the date of patent filing or grant and the legal term of patents in the various countries where patent protection is obtained. The scope of protection afforded by a patent can vary from country to country and depends on the patent type, the scope of its patent claims and the availability of legal remedies. Patent term extensions (PTE) may be available in some countries to compensate for a loss of patent term due to delay in a product’s approval due to the regulatory requirements, while patent term adjustment may be available in some countries to compensate for administrative delays during prosecution of patents. One of the primary considerations in limiting our operations in some countries outside the U.S. is the lack of effective intellectual property protection for our products, although international and U.S. free trade agreements have included some global protection of intellectual property rights. See the Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints section. In various markets, a period of regulatory exclusivity may be provided for drugs or vaccines upon approval. The scope and term of such exclusivity will vary but, in general, the period will run concurrently with the term of any existing patent rights associated with the drug at the time of approval. Based on current sales and other factors, and considering the competition with products sold by our competitors, the patent rights we consider most significant in relation to our business as a whole, together with the year in which the basic product patent expires, are as follows: Product U.S. Basic Product Patent Expiration Year (1) Major Europe Basic Product Patent Expiration Year (1) Japan Basic Product Patent Expiration Year (1) Xeljanz 2026 2028 (2) 2025 Prevnar 13/Prevenar 13 2026 (3) 2029 Adcetris (4) 2026 (4) (4) Eliquis 2027 (5) 2026 (6) 2026 Ibrance 2027 2028 2028 Xtandi (7) 2027 (7) (7) Vyndaqel/Vyndamax/Vynmac 2026 (2028 pending PTE) (8) 2026 2026/2029 (9) Xalkori 2029 2027 (10) 2028 Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 7 Product U.S. Basic Product Patent Expiration Year (1) Major Europe Basic Product Patent Expiration Year (1) Japan Basic Product Patent Expiration Year (1) Braftovi (11) 2030 (2031 pending PTE) (11) (11) Mektovi (11) 2026 (2027 pending PTE) (12) (11) (11) Talzenna 2029 (2032 pending PTE) 2034 2034 Lorbrena 2033 2034 2036 Padcev (13) 2033 (13) (13) Tukysa 2031 (2034 pending PTE) 2031 2034 (2) Zavzpret 2031 (2034 pending PTE) 2031 (14) 2031 (14) Velsipity 2030 (2035 pending PTE) 2034 2035 (2) Prevnar 20/Prevenar 20 2035 2037 2038 Nurtec ODT/Vydura 2034 2035 2035 (2) Ngenla (15) 2035 (2) 2032 (2) 2030 (2) Cibinqo 2036 2036 2038 Tivdak (16) 2035 (16) (16) Litfulo 2034 (2037 pending PTE) 2038 2039 Abrysvo 2036 (2037 pending PTE) 2036 2036 (2039 pending PTE) Elrexfio 2036 (2037 pending PTE) 2036 (2038 pending SPC) 2036 (2038 pending PTE) Hympavzi 2036 (2038 pending PTE) (17) 2036 (2041 pending PTE) Comirnaty (18) 2041 (17)(19) 2041 Paxlovid 2041 2041 2041 (1) Unless otherwise indicated, the years pertain to the basic product patent expiration, including granted PTEs, supplementary protection certificates (SPC) or pediatric exclusivity periods. SPCs are included when granted in three out of five major European markets (France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the U.K.). Noted in parentheses is the projected year of expiry of the earliest pending patent term extension in the U.S. or Japan and/or SPC application in Europe, the term of which, if granted, may be shorter than originally requested due to a number of factors. In some instances, there are later-expiring patents relating to our products which may or may not protect our product from generic or biosimilar competition after the expiration of the basic patent. (2) Expiry is provided by regulatory exclusivity in this market. (3) The Europe patent that covers the combination of the 13 serotype conjugates of Prevenar 13 was revoked following an opposition and has now been withdrawn. There are other Europe patents and pending applications covering the formulation, various aspects of the manufacturing process, and the combination of serotype conjugates of Prevenar 13 that remain in force. (4) Adcetris is commercialized in collaboration with Takeda. Pfizer has commercialization rights for Adcetris in the U.S. and its territories and in Canada. Takeda has commercialization rights in the rest of the world. (5) Eliquis was jointly developed and is commercialized in collaboration with BMS. In the U.S., we and BMS previously settled certain patent litigations with a number of generic companies permitting their launch of a generic version of Eliquis on April 1, 2028 (the settled generic companies). We continued to litigate against three remaining generic companies and following the resolution of the litigation in our favor, the three generic companies are not permitted to launch their products until the 2031 expiration date of the formulation patent. Both the composition of matter patent expiring in November 2026 and the formulation patent expiring in 2031 may be subject to future challenges. While we cannot predict the outcome of any potential future litigation, there are certain potential alternatives that might occur which could potentially permit generic launch prior to April 1, 2028: (i) if the formulation patent is held invalid or not infringed in future litigation, through appeal, the settled generic companies and any successful future litigant would be permitted to launch on November 21, 2026; or (ii) if both patents are held invalid or not infringed in future litigation, through appeal, the settled generic companies and any successful future litigant could launch products immediately upon such an adverse decision. See also Note 16A1 . (6) The apixaban basic product patent and associated SPC were invalidated in the U.K. Additional challenges are pending in other jurisdictions. (7) Xtandi is being developed and commercialized in collaboration with Astellas, which has exclusive commercialization rights for Xtandi outside the U.S. (8) Interim patent term extension requests have been granted extending the expiry from December 2025 to December 2026, and Pfizer has pending applications for patent term extension to 2028. (9) Vyndaqel (tafamidis meglumine) basic patent expiry in Japan is August 2026 for treatment of polyneuropathy. Vynmac (tafamidis) was approved in Japan for treatment of cardiomyopathy with regulatory exclusivity expiring in March 2029. (10) Pediatric extension applications have been filed on SPCs for Xalkori in Europe. In France, Germany, and Italy the pediatric extension has been granted, extending the SPC to 2028. (11) Pfizer has exclusive rights to Braftovi and Mektovi in the U.S., Canada, Latin America, the Middle East and Africa. Ono has exclusive rights to commercialize the product in Japan and South Korea, Medison Pharma Ltd. has exclusive rights to commercialize the product in Israel and Pierre Fabre has exclusive rights to commercialize the product in all other countries, including Europe and Asia (excluding Japan and South Korea). Pfizer receives royalties from Pierre Fabre and Ono on sales of Braftovi and Mektovi. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 8 (12) Mektovi U.S. expiry is provided by a composition of matter patent. Interim patent term extension requests have been filed to extend the expiry from March 2026 to March 2027, and Pfizer has filed an application for patent term extension to August 2027. (13) Padcev is being commercialized in collaboration with Astellas. Pfizer has co-promotion rights in the U.S. Outside the U.S., Pfizer has commercialization rights in all countries in North and South America, and Astellas has commercialization rights in the rest of the world, including Europe, Asia, Australia and Africa. (14) Product not yet approved or authorized in this market. (15) Ngenla is licensed from OPKO Health, Inc., and is developed and commercialized by Pfizer, including in the U.S., Latin America, Europe, Africa, and Asia. (16) Tivdak is commercialized in collaboration with Genmab. Pfizer has co-promotion rights in the U.S. Outside the U.S., Genmab has the sole right to promote Tivdak for second-line plus mCC and has co-promotion rights for other indications in all territories except certain territories where Zai Lab has commercialization rights (mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan). (17) The basic product patent application has been filed in this market. If granted, a full term is expected in this market. (18) Product is being commercialized in collaboration with BioNTech. The Comirnaty trademark covers marketed variants. (19) Pfizer does not have co-promotion rights for this product in Germany. For information regarding past reported, including recently expired, patent expiration dates, please see the Patents and Intellectual Property Rights sections of our prior Annual Reports on Form 10-K. For information regarding commercialization rights, profit sharing and royalty arrangements for certain of these products, see Item 1. Business—Collaboration and Co-Promotion Agreements . Loss of Intellectual Property Rights. The loss, expiration or invalidation of intellectual property rights, patent litigation settlements and judgments and the expiration of co-promotion and licensing rights can have a material adverse effect on our revenues. Once patent protection has expired or has been lost prior to the expiration date as a result of a legal challenge, we typically lose market exclusivity on these products, and generic and biosimilar pharmaceutical manufacturers generally produce identical or highly similar products and sell them for a lower price. The date at which generic or biosimilar competition commences may be different from the date that the patent or regulatory exclusivity expires. However, when generic or biosimilar competition does commence, the resulting price competition can substantially decrease our revenues for the impacted products, often in a very short period of time. Also, if one of our product-related patents is found to be invalid by judicial, court, regulatory or administrative proceedings, generic or biosimilar products could be introduced, resulting in the erosion of sales of our existing products. Additionally, we could be subject to claims that our intellectual property rights infringe third party patents. Certain of our products have experienced patent-based expirations or loss of regulatory exclusivity in certain markets in the last few years, and we expect certain products to face new or increased generic competition over the next few years. We anticipate a significant reduction of revenue from patent-based or regulatory exclusivity expiries in 2026 through 2030 as several of our in-line products experience these expirations, with the rate of the reduction of revenues from patent-based or regulatory exclusivity expiries expected to significantly accelerate over the next few years. There is no assurance that a particular product will maintain market exclusivity for the full time period that appears in the estimates included in this Form 10-K or that we assume when we provide our financial guidance. For additional information on the impact of loss of patent-based exclusivity or regulatory exclusivity on our revenues, see the Overview of Our Performance, Operating Environment, Strategy and Outlook —Our 202 5 Performanc e and — Intellectual Property Rights and Collaboration/Licensing Rights sections within MD&A. We continue to vigorously defend our patent rights against infringement, and we will continue to support efforts that strengthen worldwide recognition of patent rights while taking necessary steps to help ensure appropriate patient access. See the Item 1A. Risk Factors — Competitive Products, — Intellectual Property Protection and — Third-Party Intellectual Property Claims sections and Note 16A1 . Trademarks . Our products are sold under brand-name and logo trademarks and trade dress. Registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms and protection is provided in some countries for as long as the mark is used while in others, for as long as it is registered. Protecting our trademarks is of material importance to us. COMPETITION Our business is conducted in intensely competitive and highly regulated markets. Many of our products face competition in the form of branded or generic drugs or biosimilars that treat similar diseases or indications. The principal forms of competition include efficacy, safety, tolerability, ease of use and cost. Though the means of competition vary among our products, demonstrating the value of our products is a critical factor for success. We compete with other companies that manufacture and sell products that treat or prevent diseases or indications similar to those treated or prevented by our major products. These competitors include other worldwide research-based biopharmaceutical companies, smaller research companies with more limited therapeutic focus and generic drug and biosimilar manufacturers. Our competitors also may devote substantial funds and resources to R&D and their successful R&D could result in erosion of the sales of our existing products and potential sales of our products in development, as well as product obsolescence. In addition, several of our competitors operate without large R&D expenses and make a regular practice of challenging our product patents before their expiration. To help address competitive trends we continually emphasize innovation, which is underscored by our multi-billion-dollar investment in R&D, as well as our business development transactions, both designed to result in a strong and differentiated product pipeline. Our investment in research continues even after drug or vaccine approval as we seek to further demonstrate the value of our products for the conditions they treat or prevent, as well as investigating potential new applications. We educate patients, physicians, payors and global health authorities on the benefits and risks of our medicines and vaccines, and seek to continually enhance the organizational effectiveness of our biopharmaceutical functions, including our efforts to effectively launch and market our products to our customers. Operating conditions have also shifted as a result of increased global competitive pressures, industry regulation and cost containment. We continue to evaluate, adapt and improve our organization and business practices in an effort to better meet customer and public needs. We also continue to support programs to help address patient affordability and access barriers, as we strive to advance fundamental health system change through our support for better healthcare solutions. For example, our Accord for a Healthier World program aims to provide our full portfolio of patented and off-patent medicines and vaccines for which Pfizer holds global rights on a not-for-profit basis to 1.2 billion people living in 45 lower-income countries around the world. Our vaccines have and may continue to face competition, including from the introduction of alternative vaccines or “next-generation” vaccines prior to or after the expiration of their patents, which may adversely affect our future results. Our biosimilars, which include biosimilars of certain inflammation & immunology and oncology biologic medicines, compete with branded products from competitors, as well as other generics and biosimilars manufacturers. We seek to maximize the opportunity to establish a “first-to- Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 9 market” or early market position for our biosimilars to provide customers a lower-cost alternative as soon as practicable and also to potentially provide us with higher levels of sales and profitability until other competitors enter the market. Generic Products . Generic pharmaceutical manufacturers pose one of the biggest competitive challenges to our branded small molecule products because they can market a competing version of our product after the expiration or loss of our patent protection, or exclusivity, and often charge much less. Several competitors regularly challenge our product patents before their expiration. Generic competitors often operate without large R&D expenses, as well as without costs of conveying medical information about products to the medical community. In addition, the approval process in the U.S. and in the EU exempts most generics from costly and time-consuming clinical trials to demonstrate their safety and efficacy, allowing generic manufacturers to rely on the safety and efficacy data of the innovator product. In China, for example, given the expansion of the QCE process and continuation of the VBP program, we expect to continue to face intensified competition by certain generic manufacturers in 2026 and beyond, which has and may continue to result in price cuts and volume loss of some of our products. In addition, generic versions of competitors’ branded products have and may continue to compete with our products. Commercial and government payors typically encourage the use of generics as alternatives to brand-name drugs in their healthcare programs, including Medicaid in the U.S., and U.S. laws generally allow, and in some cases require, pharmacists to substitute generic drugs for brand-name drugs. In a small subset of states, prescribing physicians are able to expressly prevent such substitution. Similar rules also apply in several EU member states, where national authorities typically encourage and incentivize the use of generic products. Biosimilars. Certain of our biologic products, including Enbrel (we market Enbrel outside the U.S. and Canada), already face, or may face in the future, competition from biosimilars (also referred to as follow-on biologics). Biosimilars are versions of biologic medicines that have been developed and proven to be highly similar to the original biologic in terms of safety and efficacy and that have no clinically meaningful differences in safety, purity or potency. Biosimilars have the potential to offer high-quality, lower-cost alternatives to innovative biologic medicines. In the U.S., biosimilars referencing innovative biologic products are approved by the FDA under the U.S. Public Health Service Act, whereas in the EU the EMA is responsible for evaluating the majority of applications for biosimilars through the centralized procedure. PRICING PRESSURES AND MANAGED CARE ORGANIZATIONS Commercial Pricing Pressures. Pricing and access pressures in the commercial sector continue to be significant. Overall, increasing pressure exists on U.S. providers to deliver healthcare at a lower cost and to ensure that those expenditures deliver demonstrated value in terms of health outcomes. Many employers have adopted or make available high deductible health plans, which can increase out-of-pocket costs for medicines, or are using utilization management tools or limiting access on formularies. This trend is likely to continue. Private third-party payors, such as health plans, increasingly challenge pharmaceutical product pricing, which could result in lower prices, lower reimbursement rates for payors and a reduction in demand for our products, including denial of coverage of our products, if lower cost alternatives are available. Payors often require significant discounts, or rebates, from our prices in exchange for more favorable formulary placement. Pricing pressures also may occur as a result of highly competitive biopharmaceutical markets and increasing concentration of insurers and PBMs. Healthcare provider purchasers, directly or through group purchasing organizations, are seeking enhanced discounts or implementing more rigorous bidding or purchasing review processes. We believe medicines and vaccines are the most efficient and effective use of healthcare dollars based on the value they deliver to the overall healthcare system. We work with law makers and advocate for solutions that effectively improve patient health outcomes, lower costs to the healthcare system, and help ensure access to medicines and vaccines within an efficient and affordable healthcare system. This includes assessing our go-to market model to help address patient affordability challenges. We have engaged with major payors and the U.S. government to explore opportunities to improve access and reimbursement in an effort to drive pro-patient policies. In addition, in response to the evolving U.S. and global healthcare spending landscape, we work with health authorities, health technology assessment and quality measurement bodies and major U.S. payors throughout the product-development process to better understand how these entities value our compounds and products. Further, we are developing stronger support designed to demonstrate the value of the medicines and vaccines that we discover or develop, register and manufacture. For information on government pricing pressures, see the Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints and Item 1A. Risk Factors — Pricing and Reimbursement sections. Managed Care Organizations. The evolution of managed care in the U.S. has been a major factor in the competitiveness of the healthcare marketplace. Approximately 314 million people in the U.S. now have some form of health insurance coverage, and the marketing of prescription drugs and vaccines to both consumers and the entities that manage coverage in the U.S. continues to grow in importance. In particular, the influence of MCOs has increased in recent years due to the growing number of patients receiving coverage through MCOs. At the same time, consolidation in the MCO industry has resulted in fewer, even larger MCOs, which enhances those MCOs’ ability to negotiate lower pricing and further increases their importance to our business. Since MCOs purport to seek to contain and reduce healthcare expenditures, their growing influence has increased downward pressure on drug prices, as well as negatively impacted revenues. MCOs and their PBMs typically negotiate prices with pharmaceutical providers by using formularies (which are lists of approved medicines available to MCO members), clinical protocols (which require prior authorization for a branded product if a generic product is available or require the patient to first fail on one or more generic products before permitting access to a branded medicine), long-term contracts and their ability to influence volume and market share of prescription drugs. In addition, by placing branded medicines on higher-tier or non-preferred status in their formularies, MCOs transfer to the patient higher patient out-of-pocket expenses. This financial disincentive is a tool for MCOs to manage drug costs and channel patients to medicines preferred by the MCOs. We expect payment reforms for MCOs will continue to evolve with increased emphasis on expanded participation and on removing barriers to equitable healthcare. The breadth of the products covered by formularies can vary considerably from one MCO to another, and many formularies include alternative and competitive products for treatment of particular medical problems. MCOs emphasize primary and preventive care, out-patient treatment and procedures performed at doctors’ offices and clinics as ways to manage costs. Hospitalization and surgery, typically the most expensive forms of treatment, are carefully managed, and drugs that can help in chronic care management and reduce the need for hospitalization, professional therapy or surgery may become favored first-line treatments for certain diseases. At the same time, MCOs may seek to exclude high-cost drugs from formularies in their efforts to manage and lower their costs. Exclusion of a product from a formulary or other restrictions can significantly impact drug usage in the MCO or PBM managed patient population and beyond. Consequently, pharmaceutical companies compete to gain access to formularies for their products, typically on the basis of unique product features, such as greater efficacy, better patient ease of use, or fewer side effects, as well as the overall cost of the therapy. We continue Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 10 to seek to ensure that our major products are included on MCO formularies. However, our branded products are increasingly being placed on the higher tiers or in a non-preferred status. Continuing efforts by managed care entities to contain or reduce costs of healthcare and/or impose price controls may adversely affect demand for our products and our financial performance. See the Item 1A. Risk Factors — Managed Care Trends section. Over the last year, PBM practices have come under scrutiny from Federal and State policymakers. These legislations, enforcements, settlements and related guidance and rules could have implications to our business, including how we engage with these entities as well as the formulary status of our products. Agreement with the U.S. Government. In September 2025, we announced an agreement with the Trump Administration in which we voluntarily agreed to implement measures designed to make certain drug prices for U.S. patients more comparable to those in other developed countries. We are also participating in the TrumpRx.gov platform, which allows U.S. patients to purchase certain medicines at significant discounts to current retail prices, where the large majority of the Company’s primary care treatments and some select specialty brands will be offered at savings that will range as high as 85% and on average 50%. The September 2025 agreement also provides a three-year grace period during which time our products will not face Section 232 tariffs, provided the Company further invests in manufacturing in the U.S. Pfizer is now in the process of entering into binding final agreements to implement these arrangements. See the Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints and Item 1A. Risk Factors — Pricing and Reimbursement sections. RAW MATERIALS We procure raw materials essential to our business from numerous suppliers worldwide. In general, these materials have been available in sufficient quantities to support our demand and in many cases are available from multiple suppliers. We do not anticipate the availability of raw materials to have a significant impact on our operations in 2026, but are monitoring potential supply chain disruptions as a result of ongoing geopolitical and trade negotiations, which could, among other things, impact costs. We are continuing to monitor and implement mitigation strategies to reduce any potential risk or impact including active supplier management, qualification of additional suppliers and advanced purchasing to the extent possible. GOVERNMENT REGULATION AND PRICE CONSTRAINTS We are subject to extensive regulation by government authorities in the countries in which we do business. This includes laws and regulations governing the operations of biopharmaceutical companies, such as the research and development, testing, approval, manufacturing and marketing of products, pricing (including discounts and rebates) and price reporting, interactions with healthcare professionals, institutions, and referral sources, reporting of remuneration provided to healthcare providers and academic medical centers, financial assistance provided to patients, clinical research, data privacy and information security, among others. These laws and regulations may require administrative guidance for implementation, and a failure to comply could subject us to legal and/or administrative actions. Enforcement measures may include substantial fines and/or penalties, orders to stop non-compliant activities, criminal charges, warning letters, product recalls or seizures, delays in product approvals, exclusion from participation in government programs or contracts as well as limitations on conducting business in applicable jurisdictions, and could result in harm to our reputation and business. See Note 16A . Compliance with these laws and regulations is costly, and requires significant technical expertise and capital investment to ensure compliance. In the U.S. Drug and Biologic Regulation . The FDA, pursuant to the FFDCA, the Public Health Service Act and other federal statutes and regulations, extensively regulates pre- and post-marketing activities related to our biopharmaceutical products and devices. The statutes and regulations govern areas such as safety and efficacy, clinical trials, advertising and promotion, quality control, manufacturing, labeling, distribution, post-marketing safety surveillance and reporting, and record keeping. Other U.S. federal agencies, including the DEA, may also regulate certain of our products and activities. For a biopharmaceutical company to market a drug or a biologic product, including vaccines, the FDA must approve a product’s NDA or BLA (or supplemental NDA or supplemental BLA). Prior to such approval, the FDA will evaluate whether the product is safe and effective for its intended use. A drug or biologic may be subject to post marketing commitments, which are studies or clinical trials that the product sponsor agrees to conduct, or post marketing requirements, which are studies or clinical trials that are required as a condition of approval. In addition, we are also required to report adverse events and comply with cGMPs (the FDA regulations that govern all aspects of manufacturing quality for pharmaceuticals) and the Drug Supply Chain Security Act (the law that, among other things, sets forth requirements related to product tracing, product identifiers and verification for manufacturers, wholesale distributors, third-party logistics providers, re-packagers and dispensers to facilitate the tracing of product through the pharmaceutical distribution supply chain), as well as advertising and promotion regulations. See the Item 1A. Risk Factors — Development, Regulatory Approval and Marketing of Products and — Post-Authorization/Approval Data sections. We are also responsible for monitoring, reviewing, and the periodic reporting of adverse drug experience, or pharmacovigilance, including information received from any source, such as commercial marketing experience, postmarketing clinical investigations, postmarketing epidemiological or surveillance studies, clinical trials conducted by other parties within and outside the U.S., reports in the scientific literature, and unpublished scientific papers. In the context of public health emergencies, like the COVID-19 pandemic, we may apply to the FDA for an EUA which, if granted, allows for the distribution and use of our products during the declared emergency, in accordance with the conditions set forth in the EUA, unless the EUA is terminated by the government. Although the criteria for an EUA differ from the criteria for approval of an NDA or BLA, EUAs nevertheless require the development and submission of data to satisfy the relevant FDA standards, and a number of ongoing obligations. The FDA generally expects EUA holders to work toward submission of full applications, such as a BLA or an NDA, as soon as possible. Biosimilar Regulation. The FDA regulates biosimilars which are follow-on products that reference an innovative biological product. A product is biosimilar if the products are highly similar and there are no clinically meaningful differences between them. A biosimilar is interchangeable if switching the products does not decrease safety or efficacy. In many states, interchangeable biosimilars may be substituted for the reference product at the pharmacy. A biosimilar application may not be filed until four years, and not approved until 12 years, after reference product licensure. No other interchangeable may be approved until one year after approval of the first interchangeable. Sales and Marketing Regulations . Our marketing and promotional practices are subject to federal and state laws, such as the Anti-Kickback Statute (AKS), Civil Monetary Penalties Law, False Claims Act and state laws governing kickbacks and false claims, intended to prevent fraud and abuse in the healthcare industry. These laws can apply to both our direct-to-consumer marketing practices as well as our marketing to Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 11 clinicians and healthcare facilities. The AKS prohibits, among other things, soliciting, offering, receiving, or paying anything of value to generate business that may be paid for, in whole or in part, by a federal healthcare program. The Civil Monetary Penalties Law covers a variety of conduct, often violations under other laws, and includes penalties for AKS violations as well as causing the submission of false claims. The False Claims Act generally prohibits anyone from knowingly and willingly presenting, or causing to be presented, any claims for payment for goods or services, including to government payors, such as Medicare and Medicaid, that are false or fraudulent including false certifications of compliance with applicable law. The federal government and states also regulate sales and marketing activities and financial interactions between manufacturers and healthcare providers and academic medical centers, requiring disclosure to government authorities and the public of such interactions, and the adoption of compliance standards or programs. State attorneys general have also taken action to regulate the marketing of prescription drugs under state consumer protection and false advertising laws. Pricing, Reimbursement and Access Regulations. Pricing and reimbursement for our products depend in part on government regulation. Any significant efforts at the federal or state levels to reform the healthcare system by changing the way healthcare is provided or funded or to expand controls on drug pricing, implement international reference pricing, including Most-Favored-Nation (MFN) drug pricing, or impact government reimbursement and access to medicines and vaccines on public and private insurance plans or consumer purchasing platforms could have a material impact on us. In May 2025, the Trump Administration issued an Executive Order titled “Delivering Most-Favored Nation Prescription Drug Pricing to American Patients”, outlining a plan to reduce prescription drug costs in the U.S., which was followed by formal letters to major pharmaceutical companies (including Pfizer) in July 2025 outlining steps they should take to lower prescription drug costs to U.S. patients and taxpayers (collectively, the MFN Initiatives). In September 2025, Pfizer announced an agreement with the Trump Administration in which we voluntarily agreed to implement measures designed to make certain drug prices for U.S. patients more comparable to those in other developed countries. We are also participating in the TrumpRx.gov platform, which allows U.S. patients to purchase certain medicines at significant discounts to current retail prices. The September 2025 agreement also provides a three-year grace period during which time our products will not face Section 232 tariffs, provided the Company further invests in manufacturing in the U.S. Pfizer is now in the process of entering into binding final agreements to implement these arrangements. In addition, we must offer discounts or rebates on purchases of pharmaceutical products, and often voluntarily agree to supplemental rebates, under various government programs including Medicare, Medicaid, the Veterans Administration and the 340B Program. We also must report specific prices to state and federal government agencies. The calculations necessary to determine the prices reported are complex and the failure to do so accurately may expose us to enforcement measures. See the discussion regarding rebates in the Product Revenue Deductions section within MD&A and Note 1G . The drug pricing provisions of the IRA have been and continue to be implemented. The IRA includes several provisions intended to lower prescription drug costs for Medicare patients and to reduce drug spending by the federal government. The IRA also made significant changes to the Medicare Part D benefit design (IRA Medicare Part D Redesign), which took effect beginning in 2025 and negatively impacted our 2025 revenues by approximately $1 billion. We do not expect a material, incremental impact from the IRA Medicare Part D Redesign in 2026 versus the baseline set in 2025. Among other things, the IRA enhanced the Medicare Part D benefit by eliminating the coverage gap (“donut hole”) beginning in 2025, added a maximum out-of-pocket cap for Medicare beneficiaries (set at $2,100 for 2026), and created a new program, the Medicare Prescription Payment Plan, that allows patients to pay their cost-sharing over time. These changes also include a new Medicare Part D Manufacturer Discount Program, which changed our discounting obligations for Medicare Part D utilization of our drugs. Specifically, this program requires manufacturers to provide a 10% discount on branded prescriptions in the initial coverage phase and a 20% discount in the catastrophic phase. The IRA also imposes rebates under Medicare Part B and Medicare Part D on drug price increases that outpace inflation, and directs HHS to set the prices of certain high-expenditure, single-source drugs and biologics covered under Medicare, known as the MDPNP. In August 2023, CMS published the first ten medicines subject to the MDPNP, which included Eliquis. In August 2024, the government released the new Medicare price for Eliquis, which, effective January 1, 2026, is required to be offered to all Medicare beneficiaries at the price established by the government (known as the Maximum Fair Price). The Maximum Fair Price also must be offered to covered entities participating in the 340B Program that dispense Eliquis to a Medicare beneficiary when the Maximum Fair Price is lower than the statutorily-mandated price such entities are offered under the 340B Program. In January 2025, CMS announced the selection of another 15 drugs from Medicare Part D for the Maximum Fair Price, with prices to be set and effective on January 1, 2027. Ibrance and Xtandi were included in the list of 15 drugs selected. Another 15 drugs from Medicare Part B or Medicare Part D were selected on January 27, 2026, for the Maximum Fair Price to be set and effective on January 1, 2028. Xeljanz was included in the list of 15 drugs selected. It is possible that more of our products could be selected in future years, which could, among other things, lead to lower revenues. The MDPNP is currently subject to legal challenges and therefore, the outcome of the MDPNP remains uncertain. We continue to evaluate the impact of the IRA on our business, operations and financial condition and results as the full effect of the IRA on our business and the pharmaceutical industry remains uncertain. See the discussion regarding the IRA in the Overview of Our Performance, Operating Environment, Strategy and Outlook—Our Operating Environment section within MD&A. Changes to the MDRP or the 340B Program also could have a material impact on our business. For example, certain changes finalized by CMS in a December 2020 final rule, including which products qualify as “line extension” drugs subject to increased rebate liability, may have a material adverse impact on our business. Additionally, in September 2024, CMS finalized a new rule that, among other items, expands the scope of medications considered to be “covered outpatient drugs” that could be subject to rebates under the MDRP and imposes penalties on covered outpatient drugs that CMS determines to be “misclassified.” Changes to the way we calculate Average Sales Price under the Medicare Part B program, including new rules regarding the treatment of bundled sales and bona fide service fees that were finalized in a November 2025 final rule, also may impact the reimbursement amount available to providers for our Part B products administered to Medicare beneficiaries. These changes could impact our revenues for such products if Part B reimbursement amounts are negatively impacted. Many pharmaceutical manufacturers believe the 340B Program continues to expand beyond the original intent of serving low-income/uninsured patients. However, there has been limited government oversight to control this significant growth. Accordingly, several manufacturers, including Pfizer, have implemented initiatives and policies seeking to improve 340B Program integrity and transparency, such as establishing certain conditions related to use of contract pharmacies, requesting or requiring limited data submissions by covered entities, and pursuing use of rebate models. Some of these efforts have been the subject of legal challenges and other advocacy efforts by covered entities, states, and/or the HHS Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the agency that administers the 340B Program. In 2022, we implemented a policy to help improve contract pharmacy integrity. In 2021 and 2022, HRSA sent letters to numerous manufacturers (not including Pfizer) that implemented contract pharmacy policies and integrity initiatives; the letters expressed HRSA’s view that those manufacturers’ policies were in violation of the 340B Program statute. Several manufacturers challenged HRSA’s enforcement letters in federal court. We believe that our policy is consistent with the statute and supported by the federal court decisions issued to date. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 12 In addition, some states have enacted laws seeking to address various aspects of manufacturer policies related to contract pharmacy transactions in their states. Several stakeholders have challenged such laws and litigation is ongoing in several jurisdictions. Certain courts have decided these challenges in favor of manufacturers and other courts have ruled in favor of relevant states. Additionally, other states have considered and could enact similar laws going forward, although any such laws also may be subject to legal challenges. Additional legal or legislative developments at the federal or state level with respect to the 340B Program may have an adverse impact on our integrity initiative, and we may face enforcement action or penalties, depending upon such developments. The 340B Program continues to be a subject of congressional scrutiny and inquiries, litigation, and other developments, any or all of which could affect the scope of the 340B Program and Pfizer’s obligation to offer the 340B price to 340B Program-covered entities under the 340B Program. See the Item 1A. Risk Factors — Pricing and Reimbursement section. States seek to control healthcare costs related to Medicaid and other state regulated healthcare programs. A majority of states use preferred drug lists to manage access to pharmaceutical products under Medicaid, including some of our products. States may seek to negotiate supplemental rebate agreements that are larger than the minimum federal requirement for preferred formulary access. Preferred access to our products under the Medicaid managed care programs are often determined by the managed care health plans contracted by the state to administer benefits, which may also require supplemental rebates for preferred formulary access. We expect states will continue to seek cost cutting, which may focus on managed care capitation payments, upper pricing limits, supplemental rebates, and/or formulary management. Coverage and cost sharing for certain insurance programs including Medicare, Medicaid and Children’s Health Immunization Program (CHIP) can depend on recommendations from advisory committees, including the U.S. Preventive Services Taskforce (USPSTF) and the ACIP. Changes in the recommendations or structure of those committees may affect the use of our medicines and vaccines. In the U.S., there is considerable public and government scrutiny of pharmaceutical pricing and intellectual property and we expect to see continued focus by federal and state governments on regulating pricing and access to medicine, in addition to actions already taken, which could result in legislative and regulatory changes. Further efforts by states and the federal government to regulate prices or payment for pharmaceutical products, including proposed actions to facilitate drug importation, implement international reference pricing, including MFN drug pricing, or establish upper pricing limits that cap reimbursement to lower reference prices, require deep discounts, impose financial penalties related to pricing practices, and require manufacturers to report and make public price increases and sometimes a written justification for the increase, could adversely affect our business if implemented. Further, commercial payors often follow Medicare coverage and reimbursement policies when setting their own payment rates. Any reduction in cost or other containment measures may similarly be adopted by commercial plans. Payors may continue to promote generic drugs and biosimilars more aggressively to generate savings and attempt to stimulate additional price competition. In addition, we expect that consolidation and integration among pharmacy chains, wholesalers and PBMs will increase pricing pressures in the industry. See the Item 1A. Risk Factors — Managed Care Trends section. Anti-Corruption. The FCPA prohibits U.S. corporations and their representatives from offering, promising, authorizing or making payments to any foreign government official, government staff member, political party or political candidate to obtain or retain business abroad. The scope of the FCPA includes interactions with certain healthcare professionals in many countries. Other countries have enacted similar anti-corruption laws and/or regulations. Data Privacy. The number of privacy and data security laws and regulations in the U.S. to which we are subject on the federal and state level continues to increase. We routinely collect and use sensitive personal data relating to health. The legislative, regulatory and litigation landscape for privacy and data protection requirements is rapidly evolving and changing, and may limit our ability to use data globally or across borders. Data protection requirements are not universal and can conflict between jurisdictions. Compliance with those laws and regulations is made more complex by the lack of consistent standards, common definitions, or clear regulatory expectations. We also anticipate continued and new uses of data as we explore the use of AI tools both internally and externally. Enforcement of these data privacy and security laws and regulations is increasing and litigation is becoming more common, and we expect such trends will continue. Any failure or perceived failure by us to comply with applicable privacy and data protection laws and regulations, including cybersecurity breaches or incidents, could subject us to significant fines and penalties, and/or litigation, as well as negatively impact our reputation. Outside the U.S. New Drug Approvals . In the EU, the EMA conducts the scientific evaluation, supervision and safety monitoring of our innovative medicinal products that are eligible for the centralized marketing authorization procedure. Through the centralized procedure, pharmaceutical companies may submit to the EMA a single application for a marketing authorization valid in all the EU and the European Economic Area (EEA) countries. The EC grants marketing authorization by issuing a legally binding decision based on the EMA's recommendation. The centralized procedure is mandatory for certain new products (such as biotechnology and orphan medicine), optional for others (including new active substances and products with significant therapeutic, scientific, or technical innovation), and not available for all remaining products. In the U.K., the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) is the sole regulatory authority, and companies must obtain an MHRA marketing authorization to market medicines in the U.K. In Japan, the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Device Agency is involved in a wide range of regulatory activities, including clinical studies, approvals, post-marketing reviews and pharmaceutical safety. In China, the National Medical Product Administration is the primary regulatory authority for approving and supervising medicines. Health authorities in many middle- and lower-income countries might require marketing approval or scientific opinions by a recognized regulatory authority (e.g., the FDA or EMA/EC) before they begin reviewing or approving applications. By way of example, the EMA, in cooperation with the WHO, can provide scientific opinions on high priority human medicines, including vaccines, for markets outside the EU. In the EU, the European Council and the European Parliament reached an agreement in December 2025 on the most significant reform of the EU’s Pharmaceutical Legislation in 20 years (the EU Pharma Package). The reform still requires formal approval by both institutions and will enter into force upon publication in the EU’s Official Journal, expected in 2026. The reform encompasses a broad range of measures, including changes to regulatory exclusivity, incentives to combat microbial resistance, intellectual property exemptions for generic medicines, and marketing authorization procedures. Most provisions are expected to apply from 2028, following a two-year transition period. This landmark reform is expected to significantly influence the way innovative medicines are developed, authorized, monitored, and accessed across the EU. Once implemented, certain provisions of the reform could potentially have an adverse impact on our business. In the EU, several other recently adopted or proposed legislative initiatives may affect our business, including the EU HTA-R, new rules on Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 13 substances of human origin (SoHO Regulation), the ongoing reform of the rules governing SPCs, the EU Critical Medicines Act, and the EU Biotech Act. In addition, a number of EU regulations that are not primarily focused on medicinal products may nevertheless have a material impact on pharmaceutical companies. These include the EU AI Act, EU Data Act, and the EU Health Data Space Regulation, among others. Moreover, the EU is currently discussing the Digital Omnibus Package, which comprises a series of technical amendments to a wide body of EU digital legislation. Pharmacovigilance. In the EU, the EMA’s PRAC is responsible for reviewing and making recommendations on product safety issues. Specifically, the PRAC focuses on detecting, assessing and communicating the risks associated with adverse reactions of medicinal products, while considering their therapeutic effects. It also evaluates post-authorization safety studies and conducts pharmacovigilance audits. Outside developed markets, pharmacovigilance requirements vary and are generally not as extensive, but there is a trend toward increasing regulation. Pricing and Reimbursement . Certain governments, including in the different EU member states, the U.K., Japan, China, Canada and Australia provide healthcare at low-to-zero direct cost to consumers at the point of care and have significant power to regulate pharmaceutical prices or patient reimbursement levels to control costs for the government-sponsored healthcare system, particularly under global financing pressures. Governments globally may use a variety of measures to control costs, including, among others, legislative or regulatory pricing reforms, cross country collaboration and procurement, price cuts, mandatory rebates, health technology assessments, forced localization as a condition of market access, international reference pricing (i.e., the practice of a country linking its regulated medicine prices to those of other countries), QCE processes and VBP. In addition, the international patchwork of price regulation, differing economic conditions and incomplete value assessments across countries has led to varying access to quality medicines in many markets and some third-party trade in our products between countries. In China, pricing pressures have increased in recent years because of an overall focus on healthcare cost containment with the central government emphasizing improved health outcomes and decreased drug prices as key indicators of progress towards its healthcare reform. State owned hospitals and the state insurance program account for the vast majority of all drug purchases, despite recent government efforts to promote use of commercial insurance for some innovative products. For patented innovative products, drug prices have decreased dramatically as a result of adding innovative drugs (including oncology medicines, pediatric medicines, orphan drugs and medicines for chronic diseases) to the National Reimbursement Drug List via access-price negotiation. Certain patented innovative drug products are also listed for enrollment into the Catalogue of Innovative Drugs for Commercial Insurance and subject to a similar price negotiation process with selected commercial insurance stakeholders. A centralized VBP program with a tendering process implemented at both the national level and the provincial level aims to contain healthcare costs by driving utilization of generics that have passed QCE. This has resulted in further lowering the price of medicines, especially off-patent medicines; this trend is expected to continue. China is continuing its use of Health Technology Assessment, a tool used to evaluate clinical effectiveness and economic value to manage public health budgets, and is controlling mark-ups within the country using a two-invoice limited system, aiming to regulate the pricing of pharmaceutical products and certain types of medical devices. Pfizer, along with most off-patent originators, has mostly not been successful in the VBP bidding process. The government has indicated that additional drugs which are past patent-based exclusivity expiry (including biological products) could be subjected to VBP qualification in future rounds. Pfizer did not participate in the eleventh national VBP round in 2025 because it did not include any relevant Pfizer products. While certain details of future QCE expansion have been made available, we are unable to determine the impact on our business of the various pricing measures underway. Healthcare Provider Transparency and Disclosures. Several countries have implemented laws requiring (or industry trade associations have recommended) disclosure of transfers of value made by pharmaceutical companies to healthcare providers and/or healthcare organizations, such as academic teaching hospitals. Intellectual Property . Reliable patent protection and enforcement around the world are among the key factors we consider for continued business and R&D investment. The WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (WTO-TRIPS) requires participant countries to provide patent and other intellectual property-related protection for pharmaceutical products by law, with a time-limited exemption provided for least-developed countries. While some countries have made improvements, we still face patent grant, enforcement and other intellectual property challenges in many countries. While the global intellectual property policy environment has generally improved following implementation of WTO-TRIPS and bilateral/multilateral trade agreements, our growth and ability to bring new product innovation to patients depends on maintaining those standards and further progress in intellectual property protection. In certain developed international markets, governments maintain relatively effective intellectual property policies. However, in the EU, the review of the pharmaceutical legislation is reducing or modifying the overall period of regulatory data and market protection. In several emerging market countries and multilateral institutions, governments continue to address the role of intellectual property in the context of, for example, access to medicines. Considerable political and economic pressure has weakened current intellectual property protection in some countries and has led to policies such as more restrictive standards for obtaining patents and more difficult procedures for patenting biopharmaceutical inventions, restrictions on patenting certain types of inventions, revocation of patents, laws or regulations that promote or provide broad discretion to issue a compulsory license, weak intellectual property enforcement and failure to implement effective regulatory data protection. Our industry advocacy efforts focus on seeking a fair and transparent business environment for foreign manufacturers, underscoring the importance of strong intellectual property systems for all innovative industries (both domestic and foreign) and helping improve patients’ access to innovative medicines and vaccines. Data Privacy. We are subject to extensive privacy and data protection laws and regulations around the world concerning the collection, use and sharing of personal data. We routinely collect and use sensitive personal data relating to health. The legislative, regulatory and litigation landscape for privacy and data protection requirements is rapidly evolving and changing, and may limit our ability to use data globally or across borders. Data protection requirements are not universal and can conflict between jurisdictions. Compliance with those laws and regulations is made more complex by the lack of consistent standards, common definitions, or clear regulatory expectations. We also anticipate continued and new uses of data as we explore the use of AI tools both internally and externally. Enforcement of these data privacy and security laws and regulations is increasing and litigation is becoming more common, and we expect such trends will continue. Any failure or perceived failure by us to comply with applicable privacy and data protection laws and regulations, including cybersecurity breaches or incidents, could subject us to significant fines and penalties, and/or litigation, as well as negatively impact our reputation. ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS Our operations are affected by national, state and/or local environmental laws. We have made, and intend to continue to make, the expenditures necessary for compliance with applicable laws. We also are cleaning up environmental contamination from past industrial activity at certain sites. We incurred capital and operational expenditures in 2025 for environmental compliance purposes and for the clean-up of certain past industrial Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 14 activity as follows: approximately $125 million in environment-related capital expenditures and approximately $188 million in other environment-related expenses. While capital expenditures or operating costs for environmental compliance cannot be predicted with certainty, we do not currently anticipate they will have a material effect on our capital expenditures or financial position. See also Note 16A3 . As a science guided organization, we take a proactive approach to our environmental sustainability initiatives. In 2022, we announced a goal to further reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and achieve the Science Based Target Initiative’s voluntary Net-Zero Standard by 2040. As part of this goal, Pfizer aims to decrease its GHG emissions by 95% and its value chain emissions by 90% from 2019 levels by 2040. To support our goal, we are developing and implementing our emission reduction plans, including strategies to achieve reductions throughout our value chain and setting expectations for our suppliers to establish science-aligned GHG emission reduction goals. Our emission reduction plan-related expenses and capital spending incurred for 2025 were not material to our consolidated financial statements. While we expect to incur incremental capital and operational expenditures to meet our goal, we do not currently anticipate they will have a material effect on our financial position in the near term. Longer term uncertainties such as the likelihood of commercially available technologies make it difficult to predict the financial impact of meeting the goal. We continue to assess and monitor the financial impact of our GHG emission reduction plans. For a discussion of the risks associated with climate change, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors— Responsible Business P ractices section. OUR PEOPLE Our purpose is: Breakthroughs that change patients’ lives . These breakthroughs are delivered through the collaboration of our talented workforce. As of December 31, 2025, we employed approximately 75,000 people worldwide. Our ability to successfully deliver on our purpose is dependent on our people. Creating a purpose-driven workplace that attracts, nurtures, and retains top talent is a priority. We strive to build a vibrant and supportive work culture that is designed to empower colleagues to innovate, collaborate, and contribute meaningfully to improving global health. We invest in comprehensive development programs, provide merit-based opportunities for advancement, and encourage work-life integration through flexible work arrangements. We work to create an environment that prioritizes colleagues’ health and wellness. Our people-centric approach touches every aspect of the employee experience — including recruiting, benefits, compensation and development. Our Pfizer values — courage, excellence, equity and joy — remain core to all that we do. Culture. We cultivate community in our workplace to deliver on our purpose. As we work to bring together people with different perspectives and experiences we strive to foster a collaborative environment. We continue to execute a merit-based talent approach, focusing on identifying candidates with the right qualifications and ensuring they are considered for the opportunities based on their skills, abilities, and performance. We aim to provide everyone with an opportunity to demonstrate their merit. Our leaders set the tone for the company, embracing accountability and transparency, while promoting a vibrant culture in which colleagues are free to speak up and are encouraged to share views and raise concerns without fear of retaliation. Colleague Engagement . We are committed to helping our colleagues reach their full potential by recognizing their performance and leadership capabilities, while providing meaningful opportunities for growth and development. Open communication and feedback are foundational to performance, colleague engagement, and teamwork. Pfizer managers regularly engage in discussions on colleague performance and leadership behaviors to encourage breakthrough goals and strengthen leadership capabilities. Equally important is our commitment to listening and responding to colleague feedback, fostering a healthy work environment that attracts and retains talent. We are passionate about creating safe spaces at work, so our colleagues feel able and encouraged to provide feedback and raise concerns and questions. The Office of the Ombuds provides information and guidance to help colleagues address and resolve work-related issues. We also host company-wide safe space calls and provide various other public, private, and anonymous channels for colleagues to speak up without fear of retaliation. We gather colleague feedback through multiple channels to help ensure a comprehensive understanding of colleague experiences and needs, including an annual engagement survey that helps us track priority areas and equip leaders with actionable insights. Additionally, we conduct focus groups, check-in surveys, and colleague forums at various points in the employee lifecycle. These additional listening mechanisms are designed to capture real-time feedback, adapt to evolving needs, and continuously improve our ways of working. Colleague recognition drives engagement, a sense of belonging, motivation, and productivity. Our global rewards and recognition program, Bravo, lets colleagues celebrate and acknowledge each other for demonstrating Pfizer values in a way that makes an impact on the company, a colleague, a team or a patient. Performance and Leadership . Pfizer prioritizes a leadership mindset which complements our Pfizer values and behaviors and is designed to foster a workplace that is more dynamic, innovative, and compassionate, empowering all team members to contribute to our ambitious business goals. Our “Project-Based Ways of Working” allows colleagues to take on leadership roles and decision responsibilities through training, coaching, and a robust support network. Our performance management approach provides our colleagues and their managers with opportunities to set goals, receive feedback and engage in discussions on performance aimed at helping colleagues grow and develop. Growth and Development . Colleague growth is at the heart of building a future-ready workforce that thrives amid change and drives innovation, while also empowering each colleague to achieve their personal aspirations and success. As we navigate an evolving healthcare landscape, staying agile and competitive is essential to delivering breakthroughs for patients. That is why we prioritize opportunities for learning, skill-building, and growth. Such opportunities are designed to equip colleagues with the skills to tackle new challenges and seize emerging opportunities, including related to AI and technology innovation. Investing in career development not only reaffirms our commitment to colleagues’ potential, but also drives engagement, productivity, and overall job satisfaction. Health, Safety and Well-Being . At Pfizer, protecting the health, safety, and well-being of colleagues and contingent workers, all of whom are essential to driving our business forward, is an integral part of how we operate. Pfizer's Global Environment, Health & Safety (EHS) Policy and supporting standards outline our approach to assessment, evaluation, elimination, and mitigation of EHS risks across our operations globally. Our leadership is accountable for EHS compliance and risk management. Colleagues and contingent workers receive EHS training relevant to their job roles, including measures to prevent workplace incidents and injuries. In addition, we conduct workplace assessments, inspections, and audits to evaluate and continuously improve our EHS arrangements. We are committed to supporting and encouraging our colleagues’ well-being. We use results from our annual colleague engagement survey and other colleague feedback forums to inform the wellness services we offer. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 15 Pay Equity . Our commitment to pay equity for all colleagues is based on our values and our intention to continue to build a highly motivated workforce. We are committed to equitable pay practices at Pfizer for colleagues based on role, education, experience, performance, and location and we conduct a global pay equity analysis on an annual basis. ITEM 1A. RISK FACTORS This section describes the material risks to our business, which should be considered carefully in addition to the other information in this report and our other filings with the SEC. Investors should be aware that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors and that the following is not meant to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. Additionally, our business is subject to general risks applicable to any company, such as economic conditions, geopolitical events, extreme weather and natural disasters. If known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, our business operations, financial condition, operating results (including components of our financial results), cash flows, prospects, reputation or credit ratings could be materially adversely affected now and in the future. The following discussion of risk factors contains forward-looking statements, as discussed in the Forward-Looking Information and Factors that May Affect Future Results section. RISKS RELATED TO OUR BUSINESS, INDUSTRY AND OPERATIONS: MANAGED CARE TRENDS Private payors, such as health plans, and other managed care entities, such as PBMs, continue to take action to manage the utilization and costs of drugs in the U.S., the single largest market for biopharmaceutical products. The negotiating power of MCOs, PBMs and other private third-party payors has increased due to consolidation, and they, along with state and federal governments, increasingly employ tools to control costs and encourage utilization of certain drugs, including through the use of deductibles, utilization management tools, cost sharing or formulary placement. They may demand rebates and/or fees from biopharmaceutical manufacturers for preferred formulary placement, or for unrestricted access on a drug formulary. The growing availability and use of higher-cost innovative specialty pharmaceutical medicines that treat rare life-threatening conditions has also increased payor interest in the deployment of cost-containment strategies. We may fail to obtain or maintain timely or adequate pricing or formulary placement of our products, or fail to obtain such formulary placement at pricing that reflects the value of the treatment. Some payers are directing beneficiaries to third-party patient assistance programs, rather than covering certain treatments. In other instances, insurers disallow manufacturers’ co-pay assistance from counting toward reaching the deductible or out-of-pocket maximum. Both approaches can delay access to treatment or result in treatment abandonment. Further, consumers are facing responsibility for a larger portion of their prescription costs, or administrative hurdles to access, and may favor lower-cost, or generic alternatives, or seek direct-to-consumer medications outside of insurance plans. Third-party payors also use additional measures such as new-to-market blocks, exclusion lists, carve-outs or indication-based pricing and value-based pricing/contracting to improve their cost containment efforts and cost efficiency. Such payors are also increasingly imposing utilization management tools requiring prior authorization for a branded product or requiring the patient to first fail on one or more other products before permitting access to a particular branded medicine. As the U.S. third-party payor market consolidates further, and as the IRA prices become publicly available, we may face greater pricing pressure from third-party payors, including insurers and PBMs, as they continue to drive more of their patients to use lower cost alternatives or seek even larger rebates to control costs or offset losses from the IRA and other market pressures. For additional information on the IRA see the Item 1. Business –– Pricing Pressures and Managed Care Organizations and ––Government Regulation and Price Constraints and Item 1A. Risk Factors –– Pricing and Reimbursement sections. Also, business arrangements in this area are subject to a high degree of government scrutiny, and available exceptions and safe harbors under applicable federal and state fraud and abuse laws are subject to change through legislative and regulatory action, as well as evolving judicial interpretations. Our approach to these arrangements may also be informed by such government and industry guidance. COMPETITIVE PRODUCTS Competitive product launches have and may erode future sales of our products, including our existing products and those currently under development, or result in product obsolescence. Such launches continue to occur, and potentially competitive products are in various stages of development. We cannot predict with accuracy the timing or impact of the introduction of competitive products that treat or prevent diseases and conditions like those treated or prevented by our in-line products and product candidates. In addition to the impact of competitive product launches, we are facing an increasing number of potential competitors worldwide, including from China, that have expanded R&D capabilities. Some of our competitors may have competitive, technical or other advantages over us for the development of technologies and processes or greater experience in particular therapeutic areas, and technological innovation and/or consolidation among certain pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies can enhance such advantages. These advantages may make it difficult for us to compete with them successfully to discover, develop and market new products and for our current products to compete with new products or indications they may bring to market. Our products and product candidates compete, and may compete in the future, against products or product candidates that offer higher rebates or discounts, exclusionary contracting, lower prices, equivalent or superior efficacy and/or coverage, better safety or tolerability profiles, easier administration, earlier market availability or other competitive features, including greater brand recognition or potential preference to prescribe existing competitor treatments over our novel therapies. For example, with the growing competition in the vaccine space, we are subject to increasing discounts to meet competitive dynamics and to help ensure our vaccines are available in retail pharmacies. If we are unable to compete effectively, this could reduce actual or anticipated future sales, which could negatively impact our results of operations. Several manufacturers, including Pfizer, have signed voluntary agreements with the Trump Administration designed to ensure U.S. patients pay lower prices for their prescription medicines. This may impact the competitive environment, including pricing dynamics for any of our current or potential future products, as well as contracting with payers. In addition, competition from manufacturers of generic drugs, including from generic versions of competitors’ branded products that lose their market exclusivity, is a major challenge for our branded products. Certain of our products have experienced significant generic competition over the last few years. We anticipate a significant reduction of revenue from patent-based or regulatory exclusivity expiries in 2026 through 2030 as several of our in-line products experience these expirations, with the rate of the reduction of revenues from patent-based or regulatory exclusivity expiries expected to significantly accelerate over the next few years. See the Item 1. Business—Patents and Other Intellectual Property Rights Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 16 section. In China, we expect to continue to face intense competition by certain generic manufacturers, which has resulted, and may result in the future, in price cuts and volume loss of some of our products. In addition, our patented products may face generic or biosimilar competition before patent-based and/or regulatory exclusivity expires, including from “at-risk” launch (despite pending patent infringement litigation against the generic or biosimilar product) by a manufacturer of a generic or biosimilar version of one of our patented products. Generic and biosimilar manufacturers have filed or could file applications with the FDA seeking approval of product candidates that they claim do not infringe our or our collaboration and licensing partners’ patents or claim that our or our collaboration and licensing partners’ patents are not valid. We and our licensing and collaboration partners also face challenges in various jurisdictions by generic drug manufacturers to patents covering products for which we have patent rights, licenses or co-promotion rights. See Note 16A1 . We may become subject to competition from biosimilars referencing our biologic products if competitors are able to obtain marketing approval for such biosimilars. We also commercialize biosimilar products that compete with products of others, including other biosimilar products. The number of current and forthcoming competing biosimilars, coupled with Medicare’s average sales price-based provider reimbursement methodology, is expected to increase pricing pressures on our biosimilar products. Uptake of our biosimilars may be lower due to various factors, such as access challenges where our product may not receive appropriate coverage/reimbursement access or remains in a disadvantaged position relative to an innovator product. For additional information on competition our products face, see the Item 1. Business — Competition section. CONCENTRATION We recorded revenues of more than $1 billion for each of 12 products that collectively accounted for 65% of Total revenues in 2025. For example, Eliquis accounted for 13% of Total revenues in 2025. See N otes 1 and 17 . If these products or any of our other major products were to, or continue to (if applicable), experience loss of patent protection (if applicable), changes in prescription or vaccination purchasing or growth rates, reduced product demand, material product liability litigation, unexpected side effects or safety concerns, regulatory proceedings or investigations, lower governmental and/or regulatory confidence, negative publicity affecting doctor or patient confidence, pressure from competitive products, changes in recommendations and coverage, changes in labeling, pricing and access pressures, including those related to the IRA and MFN, or supply shortages or if a new, more effective product should be introduced, the adverse impact on our revenues could be significant and our revenue forecasts and expectations could prove to be inaccurate and we may fail to meet these expectations. In particular, certain of our products have experienced patent-based expirations or loss of regulatory exclusivity in certain markets in the last few years, and we expect certain products to face new or increased generic competition over the next few years. We anticipate a significant reduction of revenue from patent-based or regulatory exclusivity expiries in 2026 through 2030 as several of our in-line products experience these expirations. In addition, patents covering a number of our best-selling products are, or have been, the subject of pending legal challenges. For additional information on our patents, see the Item 1. Business — Patents and Other Intellectual Property Rights section. Furthermore, our recent business development initiatives have been concentrated in certain therapeutic areas — for example, our acquisitions of Metsera and Seagen represent significant investments in obesity and oncology, respectively, which are extremely competitive therapeutic areas. In addition, revenues from Comirnaty and Paxlovid have decreased substantially over time and could continue to decrease. For Paxlovid, utilization is expected to follow infection trends, and revenues may fluctuate based on the timing, duration and severity of COVID-19 infections. For information on risks associated with Comirnaty and Paxlovid, see the COVID-19 section below. In addition, certain of our customers account for a significant portion of our revenues. If one of our significant customers should encounter financial or other difficulties, it might decrease the amount of business such customer does with us and/or we might be unable to timely collect all the amounts that such customer owes us or at all, which could negatively impact our results of operations. In addition, we expect that consolidation and integration of pharmacy chains and wholesalers will increase competitive and pricing pressures on pharmaceutical manufacturers, including us. See Note 17C for a discussion of our significant customers. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT The discovery and development of new products, as well as the development of additional uses for existing products, are necessary for the continued strength of our business. Our product lines must be replenished over time to offset revenue losses when products lose exclusivity or market share or to respond to healthcare and innovation trends, as well as to provide for earnings growth, primarily through internal R&D or through collaborations, acquisitions, JVs, licensing or other arrangements, including co-funding agreements with third-parties . Growth depends in large part on our ability to identify and develop new products or new indications for existing products that address unmet medical needs and receive reimbursement from payors. However, balancing current growth, investment for future growth and the delivery of shareholder return remains a major challenge. The costs of product development continue to be high and are growing, as are regulatory requirements in many therapeutic areas, which may affect the complexity of drug trials, and the number of candidates we are able to fund as well as the sustainability of the R&D portfolio. Decisions made early in the development process of a drug or vaccine candidate can have a substantial impact on the marketing strategy and payor reimbursement possibilities if the candidate receives regulatory approval. We try to plan clinical trials prudently and to reasonably anticipate and address challenges, but there is no assurance that an optimal balance between trial conduct, speed and desired outcome will be achieved. In addition, potential quality issues may be identified in the course of a clinical trial that cannot be remediated to the satisfaction of a regulatory authority that may take actions within the scope of its enforcement authority, including excluding data and placing restrictions on future clinical trials. Additionally, our product candidates can fail at any stage of the R&D process, and may not receive regulatory approval even after many years of R&D. We may fail to correctly identify compounds or indications for which our science is promising or allocate R&D investment resources efficiently, and failure to invest in the right technology platforms, therapeutic areas, product classes, geographic markets and/or licensing opportunities could adversely impact the productivity of our pipeline. Further, even if we identify areas with the greatest commercial potential, the scientific approach may not succeed despite the significant investment required for R&D, and the product may not be as competitive as expected because of, among other things, the highly dynamic regulatory and market environments, the competitive landscape and the hurdles in terms of access, coverage and reimbursement. In addition, changes in the commercial landscape may impact our decisions around future product development. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 17 GLOBAL OPERATIONS We operate on a global scale and could be affected by currency and interest rate fluctuations; global trade tensions; capital and exchange controls; local and global economic conditions including inflation, recession, volatility and/or lack of liquidity in capital markets; expropriation and other restrictive government actions; changes in intellectual property; legal protections and remedies; trade regulations; tariffs; tax laws and regulations; and procedures and actions affecting approval, production, pricing, and marketing of, reimbursement for and access to our products, as well as impacts of political or civil unrest or military action, including, without limitation, the conflicts between Russia and Ukraine and in the Middle East and their economic consequences, geopolitical instability, terrorist activity, unstable governments and legal systems, inter-governmental disputes, public health outbreaks, epidemics, pandemics, natural disasters or disruptions related to climate change. Some emerging market countries may be particularly vulnerable to periods of financial, economic or political instability or significant currency fluctuations or may have limited resources for healthcare spending. As a result of these and other factors, our strategy to grow in emerging markets may not be successful, and any growth rates in these markets may not be sustainable. Additionally, local economic conditions may adversely affect the ability of payors, as well as our distributors, customers, suppliers and service providers, to pay for our products, or otherwise to buy necessary inventory or raw materials, and to perform their obligations under agreements with us. Government financing and economic pressures can lead to negative pricing pressure in various markets where governments take an active role in setting prices, access criteria (e.g., through health technology assessments) or other means of cost control. For additional information on government pricing pressures, see the Item 1. Business—Government Regulation and Price Constraints section. We continue to monitor the global trade environment and potential trade conflicts, sanctions and impediments that could impact our business. If trade restrictions or tariffs reduce global economic activity, potential impacts could include declining sales; increased costs; volatility in foreign exchange rates; a decline in the value of our financial assets and pension plan investments; required increases of our pension funding obligations; increased government cost control efforts; delays or failures in the performance of customers, suppliers and other third parties on whom we may depend for the performance of our business; and the risk that our allowance for doubtful accounts may not be adequate. In addition, issued or future executive orders, or other new or changes in laws, regulations or policy regarding tariffs or other trade or foreign policy, could have a material adverse effect on our business, earnings, cash flow, liquidity and financial guidance. As discussed above, in September 2025, Pfizer entered into a voluntary agreement with the Trump Administration and will receive a three-year grace period during which time Pfizer products will not face Section 232 tariffs, provided we further invest in manufacturing in the U.S. We face risks and uncertainties associated with the agreement and negotiating the binding final agreement, including the possibility of, among other things, unfavorable terms and increased costs related to tariffs and investment requirements and our ability to meet those investment requirements, as well as the possibility of tariffs that could be outside the scope of the agreement. The actual impact of any new tariffs on our business would be subject to a number of factors including, but not limited to, restrictions on trade, the effective date and duration of such tariffs, countries included in the scope of tariffs, changes to amounts of tariffs, and potential retaliatory tariffs or other retaliatory actions imposed by other countries. We operate in many countries and transact in many different currencies. Changes in the value of those currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, or high inflation or deflation in those countries, can impact our revenues, costs and expenses and our financial guidance. Significant portions of our revenues, costs and expenses, as well as our substantial international net assets, are exposed to exchange rate changes. In 2025, 41% of our total revenues were derived from international operations, including 21% from Europe and 12% from China, Japan and the rest of the Asia Pacific region. Future changes in exchange rates or economic conditions and the impact they may have on our results of operations, financial condition or business are difficult to predict. For additional information about our exposure to foreign currency risk, see the Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity, Capital Resources and Market Risk section within MD&A. In addition, our borrowing, pension benefit and postretirement benefit obligations and interest-bearing investments are subject to risk from changes in interest and exchange rates. The risks related to interest-bearing investments and borrowings and the measures we have taken to help contain them are discussed in the Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity, Capital Resources and Market Risk section within MD&A and Note 7E . For additional details on critical accounting estimates and assumptions for our benefit plans, see the Significant Accounting Policies and Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions—Benefit Plans section within MD&A and Note 11 . PRODUCT MANUFACTURING, SALES AND MARKETING RISKS We could encounter difficulties, delays or inefficiencies in our supply chain, product manufacturing and distribution networks, as well as sales or marketing, due to regulatory actions, shut-downs, work stoppages or strikes, approval delays, withdrawals, recalls, penalties, supply disruptions, shortages or stock-outs at our facilities or third-party facilities that we rely on, reputational harm, the impact to our facilities due to health pandemics or natural or man-made disasters, including as a result of climate change, product liability or unanticipated costs. Examples of such difficulties or delays include the inability to increase or maintain production capacity commensurate with demand; challenges related to component materials to maintain supply and/or appropriate quality standards throughout our supply network and/or comply with applicable regulations; inability to supply certain products due to voluntary product recalls or withdrawals, including, for example, our voluntary withdrawal of all lots of Oxbryta in all markets where it is approved; and supply chain disruptions at our facilities or at a supplier or vendor. In addition, we engage contract manufacturers, and, from time to time, our contract manufacturers may face difficulties or are unable to manufacture our products at the necessary quantity or quality levels. Regulatory agencies periodically inspect our manufacturing facilities, as well as third-party facilities that we rely on, to evaluate compliance with cGMP or other applicable requirements. Failure to comply with these requirements may subject us to possible legal or regulatory actions, such as warning letters, suspension of manufacturing, seizure of product, injunctions, debarment, product recalls, delays or denials of product approvals, import bans or denials of import certifications. In response to requests from various regulatory authorities, manufacturers across the pharmaceutical industry, including Pfizer, are evaluating their product portfolios for the potential presence or formation of nitrosamines and we are actively engaging with regulatory authorities on this topic. If nitrosamines are detected in products, this may lead to submission of comprehensive data packages to regulatory authorities to support discussions on the relevant intake limit for the product and potential impact on patient supply, and, in some instances, may lead to market action for such products. For example, i n 2021, Pfizer recalled Chantix due to the presence of a nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, at or above acceptable intake limits communicated by various regulatory authorities. Following issuance of updated guidance on acceptable intake limits for N-nitroso-varenicline by regulatory authorities, in 2025, Chantix returned to market in the U.S. and in certain international markets. See the Overview of Our Performance, Operating Environment, Strategy and Outlook — Our Operating Environment section within MD&A. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 18 COLLABORATIONS AND OTHER RELATIONSHIPS WITH THIRD PARTIES We depend on third-party collaborators, service providers, and others in the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization of our products and product candidates and also enter into JVs and other business development transactions. To achieve expected longer-term benefits, we may make substantial upfront payments as part of these transactions, which may negatively impact our earnings or cash flows. We rely heavily on these parties for multiple aspects of our drug development, manufacturing and commercialization activities, but we do not control many aspects of those activities. We also outsource certain services, including activities related to transaction processing, accounting, IT, manufacturing, clinical trial recruitment and execution, clinical lab services, non-clinical research, safety services, integrated facilities management and other areas. In conducting clinical trials, we may depend on contract research organizations to handle regulatory filings, monitor site performance and raise potential quality matters relating to clinical trials. Failure by one or more of the third-party collaborators, service providers and others to complete activities on schedule or in accordance with our expectations or to meet their contractual or other obligations to us; failure of one or more of these parties to comply with applicable laws or regulations; disruptions in one or more of these parties’ businesses, including unexpected demand for or shortage of raw materials or components, cyber-attacks on supplier systems, labor disputes or shortage and inclement weather, as well as natural or man-made disasters or pandemics; or any disruption in the relationships between us and these parties have or could delay or prevent the development, approval, manufacturing or commercialization of our products and product candidates, expose us to suboptimal quality of service delivery or deliverables, result in repercussions such as missed deadlines or other timeliness issues, erroneous data and supply disruptions, and could also result in non-compliance with legal or regulatory requirements or industry standards, including Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and other requirements, or subject us to reputational harm, all with potential negative implications for our product pipeline and business. Further, our revenues will be adversely affected by the termination or expiration of collaboration and co-promotion agreements that we have entered into and that we may enter into from time to time. COUNTERFEIT PRODUCTS Our reputation, in-line and pipeline portfolios render our medicines and vaccines prime targets for counterfeiters. Counterfeits pose a significant risk to patient health and safety because of the conditions under which they are manufactured—often in unregulated, unlicensed, uninspected, and unsanitary sites—as well as the lack of regulation of their contents. Failure to mitigate this threat could adversely impact consumers who use our products, potentially causing them harm. This situation, in turn, may result in the loss of patient confidence in the Pfizer name and in the integrity of our medicines and vaccines, and potentially impact our business through lost sales, product recalls, and possible litigation. The prevalence of counterfeit medicines is an industry-wide issue due to a variety of factors, including the adoption of e-commerce and the proliferation of heavily marketed compounded medicines. As consumers increasingly turn to the internet as a source for many products including medicines, they are at the same time increasingly exposed to fake medicines via the internet as criminals increasingly distribute counterfeit and substandard medicines through “rogue” online pharmacies. The internet exposes patients to greater risk as it is a preferred vehicle for dangerous counterfeit offers and scams that target unsuspecting consumers. Traffic to these generally deceptive pharmacy sites is largely driven by misplaced trust in sophisticated internet retailers and social media offers coupled with the convenience e-commerce affords consumers. Counterfeiters generally target any medicine or vaccine boasting strong demand and we have observed heightened counterfeit and fraud attempts to our internal medicine portfolio, our oncology portfolio, as well as products utilized in the treatment of COVID-19 and competitor products in therapeutic areas where we are conducting R&D. We consistently invest in an enterprise-wide strategy to aggressively combat counterfeit threats by educating patients and healthcare providers about the risks, investing in innovative technologies to detect and disrupt sophisticated internet offers and scams, proactively monitoring and interdicting supply with the help of law enforcement, and advising legislators and regulators. However, our efforts and those of others may not be entirely successful, and the presence of counterfeit medicines may continue to increase. RISKS RELATED TO GOVERNMENT REGULATION AND LEGAL PROCEEDINGS: PRICING AND REIMBURSEMENT Our future results could be adversely affected by new or changes in U.S. and international governmental regulations that mandate price controls, use international reference pricing, including MFN, increase required rebates, establish mandatory CMMI pilots (which are models designed to test certain payment and delivery systems to determine whether they result in cost savings), create coverage criteria, or limit patient access to our products. For instance, government cuts to Affordable Care Act (ACA) subsidies and state Medicaid funding could have a material impact on the pricing and demand for our products. In addition to the expansion of price controls in the U.S. in the IRA, or through a CMMI demonstration program affecting Medicare or Medicaid, the adoption of more restrictive coverage policies and price controls in new and existing jurisdictions, or the failure to obtain or maintain coverage and pricing could also adversely impact revenue. We expect pricing pressures and other cost containment measures for drugs and vaccines will continue. In the U.S., pharmaceutical product pricing is subject to government and public scrutiny and calls for reform, and, as a result, many of our products are subject to increasing pricing pressures. We expect to see continued focus by the U.S. government on regulating pricing and access to medicine. For example, in May and July 2025, the Trump Administration issued the MFN Initiatives and, in September 2025, we announced an agreement with the Trump Administration in which we voluntarily agreed to implement measures designed to make certain drug prices for U.S. patients more comparable to those in other developed countries (the MFN Agreement). We are also participating in the TrumpRx.gov platform, which allows U.S. patients to purchase certain medicines at significant discounts to current retail prices. These discounts may adversely affect revenue generated from participating drugs. Further, we face risks and uncertainties associated with the MFN Agreement, including the possibility of, among other things, unfavorable impacts to pricing and access. The MFN Agreement and broader U.S. policy efforts to implement measures designed to make certain drug prices for U.S. patients more comparable to those in other developed countries is subject to risks and uncertainties and could, among other things, negatively impact our pricing strategies, product demand or access, or competitive positioning across global markets, and may adversely affect revenues in certain markets. Additionally, the drug pricing provisions of the IRA are being implemented over the next several years. The IRA directs HHS to set the prices of certain high-expenditure, single-source drugs and biologics covered under Medicare. The IRA also imposes rebates under Medicare Part B and Medicare Part D which require manufacturers to pay rebates if price increases outpace inflation relative to a benchmark period, and replaces the Medicare Part D coverage gap discount program with a new discounting program. The drug pricing provisions of the IRA began to be implemented in 2022 and implementation efforts will continue in the coming years. In August 2023, CMS published the first ten medicines subject to the MDPNP, which included Eliquis. In August 2024, the government released the new Medicare price for Eliquis, which became effective January 1, 2026. In January 2025, CMS announced the selection of another 15 drugs from Medicare Part D for the Maximum Fair Price, with prices to be set and effective on January 1, 2027. Ibrance and Xtandi were included in the list of 15 drugs selected. Another 15 drugs from Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 19 Medicare Part B or Medicare Part D were selected on January 27, 2026, for the Maximum Fair Price to be set and effective on January 1, 2028. Xeljanz was included in the list of 15 drugs selected. It is possible that more of our products could be selected in future years, which could, among other things, lead to lower revenues. Health plans may also require rebates in addition to the Maximum Fair Price for preferred placement on a Medicare plan formulary. The MDPNP is currently subject to legal challenges and therefore, the outcome remains uncertain. We continue to evaluate the impact of the IRA on our business, operations and financial condition and results as the full effect of the IRA on our business and the pharmaceutical industry remains uncertain. For additional information, see the Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints section. Payors may give preference to generic drugs and biosimilars more aggressively to generate savings and attempt to stimulate additional price competition. In addition, we expect that consolidation and integration among pharmacy chains, wholesalers and PBMs will increase pricing pressures in the industry. Some states have implemented, and others are considering, patient access constraints or cost cutting under state regulated programs including the Medicaid program. States have continued to focus on addressing drug costs, generally by increasing price transparency or attempting to limit drug price increases for state-regulated insurance. Measures to regulate prices or payment for pharmaceutical products, including legislation on drug importation, international reference pricing and prescription drug affordability boards (PDABs) that seek to impose reimbursement limits for certain drugs, could adversely affect our business. For additional information on U.S. pricing and reimbursement, see the Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints section. We encounter similar regulatory and legislative issues in most other countries in which we operate. In certain markets, such as in EU member states, the U.K., Japan, China, Canada and Australia, governments have significant power as large single payors to regulate prices, access criteria, or impose other means of cost control, particularly as a result of global financing pressures. For example, the QCE and VBP tender process in China has resulted in significant price cuts for off-patent medicines. Additionally, in the EU, the European Parliament and the European Council reached an agreement in December 2025 on the EU Pharma Package – the largest reform of the EU’s Pharmaceutical Legislation in 20 years. The reform still requires formal approval by both institutions and will enter into force upon publication in the EU’s Official Journal, expected in 2026. Most provisions are expected to apply from 2028, following a two-year transition period. This landmark reform is expected to significantly influence the way innovative medicines are developed, authorized, monitored, and accessed across the EU. In addition, the European Regulation on Health Technology Assessment (EU HTA-R) took effect in January 2025, introducing a single EU-level submission file for joint clinical assessments for oncology medicines and advanced therapy medicinal products. The EU HTA-R will be extended to orphan medicines in January 2028 and, as of 2030, will cover all medicinal products authorized in the EU through the centralized marketing authorization procedure. For additional information regarding these government initiatives, see the Item 1. Business — Government Regulation and Price Constraints section. We anticipate that these and similar initiatives will continue to increase pricing and access pressures globally. In addition, in many countries, with respect to our vaccines, we participate in a tender process for selection in national immunization programs. Failure to win national immunization tenders or to obtain acceptable pricing, as well as recent entry of additional competitors, could adversely affect our business. U.S. HEALTHCARE REGULATION The U.S. healthcare industry is highly regulated and subject to frequent and substantial changes. Major U.S. healthcare reform occurred with the passage of the OBBBA on July 4, 2025, a budget reconciliation bill that includes significant funding cuts to Medicaid, the Health Insurance Marketplaces, and the Medicare Physician Fee Schedule. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates the OBBBA will reduce federal healthcare spending and lead to a 10 million increase in the U.S. uninsured population, all of which could lead to increased pricing controls and lower demand for our products. Any additional efforts at the U.S. federal or state levels to reform the healthcare system by changing the way healthcare is provided or funded could have a material impact on us. For additional information on U.S. healthcare regulation, see the Item 1. Business––Government Regulation and Price Constraints section. Other U.S. federal or state legislative or regulatory action and/or policy efforts could adversely affect our business, including, among others, general budget control actions, changes in patent laws, the importation of prescription drugs to the U.S. at prices that are regulated by foreign governments, revisions to reimbursement of biopharmaceuticals under government programs that could reference international prices or require new discounts, including through a CMMI demonstration, the FDA's recently adopted policy of disclosing Complete Response Letters for unapproved drug candidates and the attendant risk of disclosure of trade secrets or confidential commercial information, limitations on interactions with healthcare professionals and other industry stakeholders, restrictions on pharmaceutical advertising, or the use of comparative effectiveness methodologies that could be implemented in a manner that focuses primarily on cost differences and minimizes the therapeutic differences among pharmaceutical products and restricts access to innovative medicines. In addition, we may face increased risks to, among other things, our business, revenue, earnings, reputation or financial guidance, as a result of recent or potential changes to vaccine or other healthcare policy in the U.S. Further, the evolving vaccine landscape is becoming more challenging and increases risks to Pfizer. Among other things, risks include changing regulatory requirements, including for potential development or approval of our vaccine candidates, government investigations, changes in legislation, policy, liability landscape or other administrative actions, changes, delays or failure to receive recommendations, reimbursement, regulatory approvals and coverage for our vaccines, restrictions on pharmaceutical advertising and changes to government agencies and advisory boards. For example, in January 2026, the CDC unilaterally reduced the number of immunizations routinely recommended for all children in the U.S. Any additional reduction of U.S. federal spending on entitlement programs beyond the IRA, including Medicare, Medicaid, or any other publicly funded or subsidized health programs, and the 340B Program, may affect payment for our products or services provided using our products. Any other significant spending reductions or cost controls affecting Medicare, Medicaid or other publicly funded or subsidized health programs that may be implemented could have an adverse impact on our results of operations. The IRA is being implemented largely through government guidance and as its effect on Medicare and commercial markets evolve, we will continue to evaluate the potential impacts to our business. We expect additional drug cost containment efforts at both the federal and state levels, as evidenced by the MFN Initiatives and the December 2025 issue by HHS of proposed rules for mandatory CMMI pilots which could require additional price concessions. Further, commercial payors often follow Medicare coverage policy and payment limitations when setting their own payment rates. Any reduction in cost or other containment measures may similarly be adopted by commercial plans. Coverage policies and reimbursement rates for commercial plans may change at any time. Even if favorable coverage and reimbursement status is attained for one or more products, less favorable coverage policies and reimbursement rates may be implemented in the future. DEVELOPMENT, REGULATORY APPROVAL AND MARKETING OF PRODUCTS The discovery and development of drugs, vaccines and biological products are time consuming, costly and unpredictable. The outcome is inherently uncertain and involves a high degree of risk due to the following factors, among others: Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 20 • The process from early discovery to design and adequate implementation of clinical trials to regulatory approval can take many years and have high costs. • We may have difficulties recruiting and enrolling patients for clinical trials on a consistent basis. • Product candidates can and do fail at any stage of the process, including as the result of unfavorable pre-clinical and clinical trial results, or unfavorable new pre-clinical or clinical data and further analyses of existing pre-clinical or clinical data, including results that may not support further clinical development of the product candidate or indication. • Regulatory decisions or feedback could impact the future development of our product candidates, including our vaccine candidates such as our next generation pneumococcal conjugate vaccine candidate. • We may need to amend our clinical trial protocols or conduct additional clinical trials under certain circumstances, for example, to further assess appropriate dosage or collect additional safety data. • We may not be able to meet anticipated pre-clinical or clinical endpoints, commencement and/or completion dates for our pre-clinical or clinical trials, regulatory submission dates, regulatory approval dates and/or launch dates. • We may not be able to successfully address all the comments received from regulatory authorities such as the FDA and the EMA, or be able to obtain approval for new products and indications from regulators. • We may experience increasing inconsistencies and unexpected changes in the evaluations and determinations made by the FDA during the process of applying for marketing approvals of our products due to reductions in workforce, personnel movements, and policy changes. Regulatory approvals of our products depend on a myriad of factors, including regulatory determinations as to the product’s safety and efficacy. In the context of public health emergencies like the COVID-19 pandemic, regulators evaluate various factors and criteria to potentially allow for marketing authorization on an emergency or conditional basis. Additionally, clinical trial and other product data are subject to differing interpretations and assessments by regulatory authorities. As a result of regulatory interpretations and assessments or other developments that may occur during the review process, or even after a product is authorized or approved for marketing, a product’s commercial potential could be adversely affected by potential emerging concerns or regulatory decisions regarding or impacting the scope of indicated patient populations, labeling or marketing, manufacturing processes, safety issues and/or other matters, including decisions relating to developments regarding potential product impurities. Also, certain of our products have received and may in the future receive approvals under accelerated approval pathways, or other determinations of regulatory flexibility by the FDA, where continued approval may be contingent upon confirmatory studies demonstrating the anticipated clinical benefit and/or safety profile. We may not be able to receive or maintain favorable recommendations by technical or advisory committees, such as the ACIP or an FDA Advisory Committee, which may impact the availability or commercial potential, or insurance coverage of our products and product candidates. In addition, administrative decisions relating to our products or product candidates may not follow the expected process. For example, as discussed above, in January 2026 the CDC unilaterally reduced the number of immunizations routinely recommended for all children in the U.S. Further, claims and concerns that may arise regarding the safety and/or efficacy of in-line products and product candidates can negatively impact current or future product sales, as applicable, and potentially lead to regulator-directed risk evaluations and assessments, asset impairments, and/or consumer fraud, product liability and other litigation and claims, as well as product recalls or withdrawals, including our voluntary withdrawal of all lots of Oxbryta in all markets where it is approved, and any regulatory or other impact on Oxbryta or other sickle cell disease assets. Regulatory requirements may also result in a more challenging, expensive and lengthy regulatory approval process than anticipated due to requests for, among other things, additional or more extensive clinical trials prior to granting approval, or increased post-approval requirements. For these and other reasons discussed in this Risk Factors section, we may not obtain the approvals we expect within the timeframe we anticipate, or at all. POST-AUTHORIZATION/APPROVAL DATA As a condition to granting marketing authorization or approval of a product, the FDA may require, or the sponsor may voluntarily agree to undertake, post-marketing commitments such as additional clinical trials or other studies. The results generated in these trials have in the past impacted certain of our products and could impact our products in the future, such as by resulting in the loss of marketing approval, changes in labeling, and/or new or increased concerns about safety and/or efficacy, including newly discovered adverse events. Regulatory agencies in countries outside the U.S. often have similar regulations and may impose comparable requirements, although there are differences between the U.S., the EU and other international regulatory requirements, which may contribute to inconsistency or uncertainty in the marketability of our products across different jurisdictions. Post-marketing studies and clinical trials, whether conducted by us or by others, whether mandated by regulatory agencies or conducted voluntarily, and other emerging data about products, such as adverse event reports, may also adversely affect the availability or commercial potential of our products. Further, if safety or efficacy concerns are raised about a product in the same class as one of our products, those concerns could implicate the entire class; and this, in turn, could have an adverse impact on the availability or commercial viability of our product(s) or product candidates as well as other products in the class. The potential regulatory, commercial or other implications of post-marketing study results typically cannot immediately be determined. In September 2024, we made the decision to voluntarily withdraw Oxbryta in all markets where it was approved based on the totality of clinical data that indicated at that time the overall benefit of Oxbryta no longer outweighed the risk in the approved sickle cell patient population. Following a comprehensive process, in October 2025, the EMA adopted a negative opinion on benefit-risk for Oxbryta for the treatment of hemolytic anemia due to SCD, recommending that the marketing authorization for the product remain suspended. In the U.S., Pfizer’s engagement with the FDA is ongoing. For more information, see the Product Developments section within MD&A. LEGAL MATTERS We are and may be involved in various legal proceedings, including patent litigation, product liability and other product-related litigation, including personal injury, consumer fraud, off-label promotion, securities, antitrust and breach of contract claims, commercial and other asserted and unasserted matters, environmental legal proceedings, government and tax investigations, employment litigation, tax litigation and other legal proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. Litigation is inherently unpredictable, and excessive verdicts do occur. Although we believe that our claims and defenses in matters in which we are a defendant are substantial, we have in the past and could in the future incur judgments, enter into settlements or revise our expectations regarding the outcome of certain matters, and such developments could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations. Claims against our patents include challenges to the coverage and/or validity of our patents on various products or processes. There can be no assurance as to the outcome of these matters, and a loss in any of these cases could result in a loss of patent protection for the product at issue, which could lead to a significant loss of sales of that product and could materially affect future results of operations. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 21 We are also involved in government investigations that arise in the ordinary course of our business. There continues to be a significant volume of government investigations and litigation against companies operating in our industry, both in the U.S. and around the world. Government investigations and actions have and could result in substantial criminal and civil fines and/or criminal charges, limitations on our ability to conduct business in applicable jurisdictions, corporate integrity or deferred prosecution agreements and other disciplinary actions, as well as reputational harm, including as a result of increased public interest in the matter. In addition, in a qui tam lawsuit in which the government declines to intervene, the relator may still pursue a suit for the recovery of civil damages and penalties on behalf of the government. Our sales and marketing activities, the pricing of our products and other aspects of our business are subject to extensive regulation under the FFDCA, the MDRP, the FCPA and other federal and state statutes, including those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K, as well as the AKS, anti-bribery laws, the False Claims Act, consumer protection statutes and similar laws in international jurisdictions. In addition to the potential for changes to relevant laws, the compliance and enforcement landscape is informed by government litigation, settlement precedent, advisory opinions, and special fraud alerts. Our approach to certain practices may evolve over time in light of these types of developments. Requirements or industry standards in the U.S. and certain jurisdictions abroad require pharmaceutical manufacturers to track and disclose financial interactions with healthcare professionals and healthcare providers and can increase government and public scrutiny of such financial interactions. If an interaction is found to be improper, government enforcement actions and penalties could result. Like many companies in our industry, we have from time to time received, and may receive in the future, inquiries and subpoenas and other types of information demands from government authorities. In addition, we have been and may in the future be subject to claims and other actions related to our business activities, brought by governmental authorities, as well as consumers and private payors. In some instances, we have incurred significant expense, civil payments, fines and other adverse consequences as a result of these claims, actions and inquiries. Such claims, actions and inquiries may relate to alleged non-compliance with laws and regulations associated with the dissemination of product (approved and unapproved) information, potentially resulting in government enforcement action and reputational damage. These risks may be heightened by the use of AI in our operations as well as in our digital marketing, including social media, mobile applications and blogger outreach, as well as direct-to-consumer marketing and digital platform offerings. We and certain of our subsidiaries are also subject to numerous contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business relating to legal claims and proceedings, including environmental contingencies. Amounts recorded for legal and environmental contingencies can result from a complex series of judgments about future events and uncertainties and can rely heavily on estimates and assumptions. While we have accrued for worldwide legal liabilities which we have assessed as probable and reasonably estimable, no guarantee exists that additional costs will not be incurred or additional payments will not be required beyond the amounts accrued. For additional information, including information regarding certain legal proceedings in which we are involved in, see Note 16A . RISKS RELATED TO INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, TECHNOLOGY AND SECURITY: INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY PROTECTION Our success largely depends on our ability to market technologically competitive products. We rely and expect to continue to rely on a combination of intellectual property, including patent, trademark, trade dress, copyright, trade secret and domain name protection laws, as well as confidentiality and license agreements, to protect our intellectual property and proprietary rights. If we fail to obtain and maintain adequate intellectual property protection, we may not be able to prevent third parties from launching generic or biosimilar versions of our branded products, from using our proprietary technologies or from marketing products that are very similar or identical to ours. Our currently pending or future patent applications may not result in issued patents or be granted on a timely basis. Similarly, any term extensions that we seek may not be granted on a timely basis, if at all, and any term adjustments related to patent office delays in obtaining a patent may be reduced or eliminated entirely due to risks associated with changes in law relating to patent terms. In addition, our issued patents may not contain claims sufficiently broad to protect us against claims regarding validity, enforceability, scope and effective term made by parties with similar technologies or products or provide us with any competitive advantage, including patent-based exclusivity in a particular technology or product area. Further, legal or regulatory action by various stakeholders or governments could potentially result in us not seeking intellectual property protection for or agreeing not to enforce or being restricted from enforcing intellectual property related to our products. The scope of our patent claims also may vary between countries, as individual countries have distinct patent laws, and our ability to enforce our patents depends on the laws of each country, its enforcement practices, and the extent to which certain countries engage in policies or practices that weaken a country’s intellectual property framework (e.g., laws or regulations that promote or provide broad discretion to issue a compulsory license). In countries that provide some form of regulatory exclusivity, mechanisms exist permitting some form of challenge to our patents by competitors or generic drug marketers prior to or immediately following the expiration of such regulatory exclusivity, and generic companies are employing aggressive strategies, such as “at-risk” launches that challenge our patent rights. Most of the suits involve claims by generic drug manufacturers that patents covering our products, uses, processes or dosage forms are invalid and/or do not cover the product of the generic or biosimilar drug manufacturer. Independent actions have been filed alleging that our assertions of, or attempts to enforce, patent rights with respect to certain products constitute unfair competition and/or violations of antitrust laws. Such claims may also be brought as counterclaims to actions we bring to enforce our patents. We are also party to other patent damages suits in various jurisdictions pursuant to which generic drug manufacturers, payors, governments or other parties are seeking damages from us for alleged delay of generic entry. We also are often involved in other proceedings, such as inter partes review, post-grant review, re-examination or opposition proceedings, before the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, the European Patent Office, or other foreign counterparts relating to our intellectual property or the intellectual property rights of others. Also, if one of our patents or a competitors’ patents is found to be invalid in such proceedings, generic or biosimilar products could be introduced into the market resulting in the erosion of sales of our existing products. For additional information, including information regarding certain legal proceedings in which we are involved, see Note 16A1 . Further, if we are unable to maintain our existing license agreements or other agreements pursuant to which third parties grant us rights to intellectual property, our operating results and financial condition could be adversely affected. We currently hold trademark registrations and have trademark applications pending in many jurisdictions, any of which may be the subject of a governmental or third-party objection, which could prevent the maintenance or issuance of the trademark. As our products mature, our reliance on our trademarks and trade dress to differentiate us from our competitors increases and, as a result, our business could be adversely affected if we are unable to prevent third parties from adopting, registering or using trademarks and trade dress that infringe, dilute or otherwise violate our rights. We seek to protect our proprietary information, including our trade secrets and proprietary know-how, by requiring our employees, consultants, other advisors and other third parties to execute proprietary information and confidentiality agreements upon the commencement of Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 22 their relationship with us. Despite these efforts and precautions, we may be unable to prevent a third-party from copying or otherwise obtaining and using our trade secrets or our other intellectual property without authorization, and legal remedies may not adequately compensate us for the damages caused by such unauthorized use. Further, others may independently and lawfully develop substantially similar or identical products that circumvent our intellectual property by means of alternative designs or processes or otherwise. THIRD-PARTY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY CLAIMS A properly functioning intellectual property regime is essential to our business model. We are committed to respecting the valid intellectual property rights of other companies, but the patent granting process is imperfect. Accordingly, the pursuit of valid business opportunities may require us to challenge intellectual property rights held by others that we believe were improperly granted, including challenges through negotiation and litigation, and such challenges may not always be successful. Part of our business depends upon identifying biosimilar opportunities and launching products to take advantage of those opportunities, which may involve litigation, associated costs and time delays, and may ultimately not be successful. These opportunities may arise in situations where patent protection of equivalent branded products has expired or been declared invalid, or where products do not infringe the patents of others. In some circumstances we may take action, such as litigation, asserting that our products do not infringe patents of existing products or that those patents are invalid or unenforceable in order to achieve a “first-to-market” or early market position for our products. Third parties may claim that our products infringe one or more patents owned or controlled by them. Claims of intellectual property infringement can be costly and time-consuming to resolve, may delay or prevent product launches, and may result in significant royalty payments or damages or potential licensing agreements. For example, our R&D in a therapeutic area may not be first and another company or entity may have obtained relevant patents before us. We are involved in patent-related disputes with third parties over our attempts to market pharmaceutical products. Once we have final regulatory approval of the related products, we may decide to commercially market these products even though associated legal proceedings (including any appeals) have not been resolved (i.e., “at-risk” launch). If one of our marketed products (or a product of our collaboration/licensing partners to which we have licenses or co-promotion rights) is found to infringe valid patent rights of a third party, such third party may be awarded significant damages or royalty payments, or we may be prevented from further sales of that product. Such damages may be enhanced as much as three-fold if we or one of our subsidiaries is found to have willfully infringed valid patent rights of a third party. Potential expansion of our mRNA portfolio could result in an increase in patent-related disputes as well. For additional information, including information regarding certain legal proceedings in which we are involved, see Note 16A1 . INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND CYBERSECURITY Significant disruptions of IT systems or breaches of information security could adversely affect our business. We extensively rely upon sophisticated IT systems (including cloud services) to operate our business. We produce, collect, process, store and transmit large amounts of confidential information (including personal information and intellectual property), and we deploy and operate an array of technical and procedural controls to maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of such confidential information. We develop and operate digital systems to engage patients, healthcare providers, governments, payors and supply chain partners to conduct business and deliver medicines, digital diagnostics, clinical trials and digital therapies. Such systems include mobile applications, wearable devices, internet websites and other digital technologies that may be targets of attack. We have outsourced significant elements of our operations, including significant elements of our IT infrastructure and, as a result, we manage relationships with many third-party providers who may or could have access to our confidential information. We rely on technology developed, supplied and/or maintained by third-parties that may make us vulnerable to “supply chain” style cyber-attacks. Further, technology and security vulnerabilities of acquisitions, business partners or third-party providers may not be identified during due diligence or soon enough to mitigate potential risks. The size and complexity of our IT and information security systems, and those of our third-party providers (and the large amounts of confidential information present on them), make such systems potentially vulnerable to service interruptions or to security breaches from inadvertent or intentional actions by, but not limited to, our employees, contingent workers, service providers, business partners, customers or malicious attackers. As a global pharmaceutical company, our systems and assets are the target of frequent cyber-attacks. Such cyber-attacks are of ever-increasing levels of sophistication, including the use of adversarial AI techniques (for example, AI may be used to automate phishing attacks and other forms of social engineering, and accelerate vulnerability exploitation), and are made by groups and individuals with a wide range of motives (including, but not limited to, industrial espionage, extortion, property destruction and personal information theft) and expertise, including, but not limited to, organized criminal groups, “hacktivists,” nation states, employees, business partners and others. Due to the sophistication of some of these attacks, there is a risk that they may remain undetected for a period of time. While we have invested in the protection of data and IT and develop and maintain systems and controls, our efforts, like those of other similar companies, have not always prevented and may not in the future prevent service interruptions, extortion, theft of confidential, personal or proprietary information, compromise of data integrity or unauthorized information disclosure. Any technology service interruption or breach of our systems could adversely affect our business operations and/or result in potential legal liability, the loss of personal data, confidential information or intellectual property. Such incidents could require disclosure to government authorities and/or regulators and could require notification to affected individuals and any incident could result in financial, legal, business and reputational harm to us. We maintain cyber liability insurance; however, this insurance may not be sufficient to cover the financial, legal, business or reputational losses that may result from an interruption or breach of our systems. AI, including machine learning and generative AI, is increasingly being used in the biopharmaceutical and global healthcare industries. We have begun deploying AI in various parts of our internal and external operations, including in R&D, and continue to explore further use cases for AI, and our investments in AI may not yield anticipated benefits. As with many developing technologies, AI presents risks and challenges. For example, existing regulatory frameworks governing the use, development, and deployment of AI, including regulatory guidance on the use of AI in medical products, remain uncertain and subject to significant change. New regulatory requirements could impose significant compliance costs, limit our ability to deploy AI, require changes to our practices (including documentation, risk management, testing, or transparency measures), or increase litigation and enforcement risk. In addition, AI may be used by payors to limit access to care or to deny prior authorization requests, which could impact Pfizer’s business results. Further, AI technology itself can give rise to risks. Generative AI output is probabilistic in nature and may not be reproducible or generate consistent results over time. AI can generate outputs that are false, misleading, incomplete, or inconsistent, and may be difficult to monitor, explain, or reproduce. AI performance may also degrade over time due to changes in inputs, data drift, updates by vendors, or adversarial manipulation. AI design or training may be flawed, including as a result of external vendors or others training AI models on content without the necessary intellectual property rights or other legal rights or permissions or using data sets that may not be appropriate for the intended use, of poor quality, contain biased information, or that become corrupted during a cyber-attack; and flawed or inappropriate data practices by data scientists, engineers, and end-users could impair results. If the output that AI produces or assists in producing is deficient or inaccurate, we could be subjected to competitive harm, regulatory scrutiny, potential legal liability and brand or reputational harm. The use of AI Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 23 may also lead to the unauthorized release of confidential or proprietary information which may impact our ability to realize the benefits of our data, including intellectual property. Further, reliance on third-party AI tools or services that incorporate AI may expose our organization to compliance gaps that are outside of our control. In addition, we could face risks related to our reliance on a small number of AI models or service providers. GENERAL RISKS BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES AND STRATEGIC GOALS We have established financial and strategic goals, which we plan to achieve, in part, by not only advancing our own product pipelines and maximizing the value of our existing products, but also through various forms of business development activities, which can include alliances, licenses, JVs, collaborations, equity- or debt-based investments, dispositions, divestments, mergers and acquisitions, including our recent acquisition of Metsera. We view our business development activity as an enabler of our strategies and seek to generate growth by pursuing opportunities and transactions that have the potential to strengthen our business and our capabilities. The success of our business development activities is dependent on the availability and accurate evaluation of appropriate opportunities, competition from others seeking similar opportunities and our ability to successfully identify, structure and execute transactions, including the ability to satisfy closing conditions in the anticipated timeframes or at all, and our ability to successfully integrate acquired businesses and develop and commercialize acquired products. Pursuing, executing and consummating these transactions may require substantial investment, which may require us to obtain additional equity or debt financing, which has in the past and could in the future result in increased leverage and/or a downgrade of our credit ratings and could limit our ability to obtain future financing. We incurred substantial indebtedness to fund certain of our acquisitions. For example, we financed a portion of the acquisitions of Seagen and Metsera with the proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt, plus additional short-term indebtedness issued prior to such acquisitions. Such short-term indebtedness was subsequently repaid. The amount of debt that we have incurred could have significant consequences including, among other things, reducing our operating or financial flexibility, requiring a portion of our cash flow from operations to make interest payments and reducing the cash flow available to fund capital expenditures and other corporate purposes and to grow our business. To the extent we incur additional indebtedness or interest rates increase, these risks could increase further. The success of our business development transactions depends on our ability to realize the anticipated benefits of these transactions and is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside of our control. Unsuccessful clinical trials, regulatory hurdles, new information, changes in competitive dynamics and commercialization challenges, among other factors, may adversely impact revenue and income contribution from business development transactions, including from acquired products and businesses, and may lead to impairment of acquired assets. We may fail to generate expected revenue growth for our existing products, product pipeline and contribution from these transactions or from acquired products or businesses or we may fail to achieve anticipated cost savings, within expected time frames or at all, which may impact our ability to meet our growth objectives. In certain transactions, we may agree to provide certain transition services for an extended period of time, which may divert our focus and resources that would otherwise be invested into maintaining or growing our business. Similarly, the accretive impact anticipated from certain transactions may not be realized or may be delayed. Integration of acquired products or businesses may result in the loss of key employees, the disruption of ongoing business, including third-party relationships, or inconsistencies in standards, controls, procedures and policies. Further, while we seek to mitigate risks and liabilities through, among other things, due diligence, we may be exposed to risks and liabilities as a result of business development transactions. There is no assurance that we will be able to acquire attractive businesses or enter into strategic business relationships on favorable terms ahead of our competitors, or that such acquisitions or strategic business development relationships will be accretive to earnings or improve our competitive position. Where we invest in or otherwise obtain debt or equity securities of third parties in connection with business development transactions, we may be unable to direct or influence the management, operational decisions and policies of such companies and the value of the acquired securities will fluctuate and may lose value. Any future distribution or sale of such securities will be subject to prevailing market conditions and other factors, including the size of our ownership stake, at the time of such distribution or sale and there is no assurance as to the price that such securities will ultimately be sold or that such securities will be sold at all. PANDEMICS Pandemics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, have impacted and may in the future impact our business, operations and financial condition and results. Related risks and challenges for our business include, among others: uncertainty regarding the severity and duration of a pandemic; impacts to business operations; decreased demand for certain of our products; increased costs of doing business; manufacturing disruptions and delays; supply chain disruptions and shortages, including challenges related to reliance on third-party suppliers resulting in reduced availability of materials or components used in the development, manufacturing, distribution or administration of our products; evolving macroeconomic factors and conditions, including general economic uncertainty, unemployment rates and recessionary pressures; changes in labor markets, including challenges related to our human capital and talent development; unknown consequences on our business performance and initiatives stemming from the substantial investment of time and other resources to any potential pandemic response; increased difficulty and uncertainty regarding predicting or estimating future performance; pace of post-pandemic recovery, disruption and volatility within the financial or credit markets; and our financial performance in general. COVID-19 We face risks and uncertainties related to our COVID-19 products, including Comirnaty and Paxlovid or any potential future COVID-19 vaccines, treatments or combinations, including, among others, the risk that as the market for COVID-19 products remains endemic and seasonal and/or COVID-19 infection rates do not follow prior patterns, demand for our COVID-19 products has and may continue to be reduced or not meet expectations, which has and may continue to lead to reduced revenues, excess inventory or other unanticipated charges; risks related to our ability to develop, receive regulatory approval for, and commercialize variant adapted vaccines, combinations and/or treatments; uncertainties related to recommendations and coverage for, and the public’s adherence to, vaccines, boosters, treatments or combinations, including uncertainties related to the potential impact of narrowing recommended patient populations; risks related to our ability to accurately predict revenue for Comirnaty and Paxlovid or any potential future COVID-19 vaccines or treatments; whether and when EUA or biologics license or drug applications or amendments to any such applications may be filed in particular jurisdictions for Paxlovid or Comirnaty or any other potential vaccine or vaccine candidates or product candidates, including those related to potential future annual boosters, re-vaccinations, or vaccines in additional populations, and if obtained, whether or when such EUA or licenses, or existing EUAs, will expire, terminate or be revoked; whether and when additional supply or purchase agreements will be reached or existing agreements will be modified; potential third-party royalties or other claims related to Comirnaty or Paxlovid; and the other risks and uncertainties discussed throughout this Item 1A. Risk Factors. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 24 RESPONSIBLE BUSINESS PRACTICES Pfizer is subject to transitional and physical risks related to climate change. Transitional risks include, for example, a disorderly global transition away from fossil fuels that may result in increased energy prices; customer preference for low or no-carbon products; stakeholder pressure to decarbonize assets; or new legal or regulatory requirements that result in new or expanded carbon pricing, taxes, restrictions on GHG emissions, and increased GHG disclosure and transparency. These risks could increase operating costs, including the cost of our electricity and energy use, or otherwise increase compliance costs. Physical risks to our operations include water stress and drought; flooding and storm surge; wildfires; extreme temperatures and storms, which could impact pharmaceutical production, increase costs, or disrupt supply chains of medicines for patients. Our supply chain is subject to these same transitional and physical risks and would likely pass along any increased costs to us. In June 2022, Pfizer established our fourth consecutive GHG reduction goal with new near- and long-term targets to achieve the Science Based Target Initiative’s voluntary Net-Zero Standard by 2040. While we are working to implement emission reduction plans to achieve our voluntary climate goals, various factors, including the long time horizons and commercial availability of new technologies to enable emission reductions, in the time and scale needed, may present inherent risk in our ability to meet these goals. Additionally, success may depend on the actions of governments and third parties and may require, among other things, significant capital investment; R&D; and government policies and incentives to foster innovation and reduce costs of technologies that may not currently exist or be available at scale. Certain governmental authorities, non-governmental organizations, customers, investors, employees, and other stakeholders have differing views on matters perceived to be related to responsible business practices, such as equitable access to medicines and vaccines, product quality and safety, human capital, diversity, equity and inclusion, environmental stewardship, support for local communities, value chain environmental and human rights due diligence, and corporate governance and transparency. In addition, certain governments and the public expect companies like us to report on our business practices with respect to human rights, responsible sourcing and environmental impact, as well as the actions of our third-party contractors and suppliers around the world. This focus may lead to new expectations or requirements that could result in increased costs associated with research, development, manufacture, or distribution of our products. Our ability to compete could also be affected by changing customer preferences and requirements, such as demand for companies to establish Net Zero targets or offer more sustainable products. While we are committed to responsible business practices, if we do not meet, or are perceived not to meet, our goals or other stakeholder expectations in these key areas, we risk negative stakeholder reaction, as well as damage to our brand and reputation, reduced demand for our products or other negative impacts on our business and operations. MARKET FLUCTUATIONS IN OUR EQUITY AND OTHER INVESTMENTS Changes in the fair value of certain equity investments that are recognized in net income may result in increased volatility of our income. See Note 4 and the Analysis of Financial Condition, Liquidity, Capital Resources and Market Risk section within MD&A. Our pension and postretirement plans are subject to volatility from changes in the fair value of equity investments and other investment risk in the assets funding these plans, as well as changes in the appropriate discount rates used to measure the plans’ obligations. See the Significant Accounting Policies and Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions — Benefit Plans section within MD&A and Note 11 . COST AND EXPENSE CONTROL AND UNUSUAL EVENTS Growth in costs and expenses, changes in product and geographic mix and the impact of acquisitions, divestitures, restructurings, internal reorganizations, product withdrawals, recalls and other unusual events that could result from evolving business strategies, evaluation of asset realization and organizational restructuring could adversely affect future results. Such risks and uncertainties include, in particular, our ability to realize the projected benefits of our cost-reduction and productivity initiatives, including our enterprise-wide cost realignment program and manufacturing optimization program, other corporate strategic initiatives and any acquisitions, divestitures or other initiatives, as well as potential disruption of ongoing business, such as potential impacts on our ability to deliver on our pipeline as planned. Additionally, as a result of these initiatives, we may experience a loss of continuity, loss of accumulated knowledge or intellectual property and/or inefficiency, adverse effects on employee morale, loss of key employees and/or other retention issues during transitional periods. Reorganizations and restructurings can require a significant amount of time and focus, which may divert attention from operating and growing our business. If we fail to achieve some or all of the expected benefits of restructuring or other initiatives, it could have a material adverse effect on our competitive position, business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. INTANGIBLE ASSETS, GOODWILL AND EQUITY-METHOD INVESTMENTS Our consolidated balance sheet contains significant amounts of intangible assets, including IPR&D and goodwill. For IPR&D assets, the risk of failure is significant, and there can be no certainty that these assets ultimately will yield successful products. Our ability to realize value on these significant investments is often contingent upon, among other things, regulatory approvals and market acceptance. As such, IPR&D assets have and may become impaired and/or be written off in the future if the associated R&D effort is abandoned or is curtailed. For goodwill, all reporting units can confront events and circumstances that can lead to a goodwill impairment charge such as, among other things, unanticipated competition, an adverse action or assessment by a regulator, a significant adverse change in legal matters or in the business climate and/or a failure to replace the contributions of products that lose market exclusivity. Our other intangible assets, including developed technology rights, brands and licensing agreements, face similar risks for impairment. Our equity-method investments may also be subject to impairment charges that may result from the occurrence of unexpected adverse events or management decisions that impact our estimates of expected cash flows to be generated from these investments. We may recognize impairment charges as a result of a weak economic environment, challenging market conditions, decisions by management, or events related to particular customers or asset types, such as the development of competing assets by us or others, regulatory actions or product recalls or withdrawals. Any such impairment charge of our intangible assets, goodwill and equity-method investments may be significant. See Note 4 for a discussion of recent impairments of intangible assets. For additional details, see the S ignificant Accounting Policies and Application of Critical Accounting Estimates and Assumptions — Asset Impairments section within MD&A. CHANGES IN LAWS AND ACCOUNTING STANDARDS Our future results could be adversely affected by changes in laws, regulations or policies, or their interpretation, including, among others, new or changes in accounting standards, tariffs, tax laws and regulations internationally and in the U.S., including, without limitation, the IRA, and the OBBBA, which is still subject to further guidance; the adoption of global minimum taxation requirements outside the U.S. generally effective in most jurisdictions since January 1, 2024; government cost-cutting measures and related impacts on, among other matters, government staffing, resources and ability to timely review and process regulatory or other submissions; restrictions related to certain data transfers, including data security, data localization and cross border data transfer regulations, and transactions involving certain countries; and potential changes to Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 25 existing tax laws, tariffs, competition laws, privacy laws and environmental laws or changes to other laws, regulations or policies in the U.S., including by the U.S. Presidential administration and Congress, as well as in other countries. For example, issued or future executive orders or other new or changes in laws, regulations or policy regarding tariffs or other trade or foreign policy, could have a material adverse effect on our business, earnings, cash flow, liquidity and financial guidance. The actual impact of any new tariffs on our business would be subject to a number of factors including, but not limited to, restrictions on trade, the effective date and duration of such tariffs, countries included in the scope of tariffs, changes to amounts of tariffs, and potential retaliatory tariffs or other retaliatory actions imposed by other countries. In the EU, several recently adopted or proposed legislative initiatives may affect our business, including the EU Pharma Package, the EU HTA -R, the EU Critical Medicines Act, and the EU Biotech Act, as well as legislation such as the EU AI Act, EU Data Act, and the EU Health Data Space Regulation, among others. See the Item 1. Business — G overnment Regulation and Price Constraints section for additional information regarding privacy and other laws. For additional information on changes in tax laws or rates or accounting standards, see the Provision/(Benefit) for Taxes on Income and New Accounting Standards sections within MD&A and Note 1B . ITEM 1C. CYBERSECURITY Managing cybersecurity risk is a crucial part of our overall strategy for safely operating our business. We incorporate cybersecurity practices into our Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) program. Management is responsible for assessing and managing risk, including through the ERM program, subject to oversight by our BOD. Our cybersecurity policies and practices are aligned with NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) industry standards. Consistent with our overall ERM program and practices, our cybersecurity program includes: • Vigilance : We maintain a global cybersecurity operation that endeavors to detect, prevent, contain, and respond to cybersecurity threats and incidents in a prompt and effective manner with the goal of minimizing business disruptions. • External Collaboration : We collaborate with public and private entities, including intelligence and law enforcement agencies, industry groups and third-party service providers to identify, assess and mitigate cybersecurity risks. • Systems Safeguards : We deploy technical safeguards that are designed to protect our information systems, products, operations and sensitive information from cybersecurity threats. These include firewalls, intrusion prevention and detection systems, disaster recovery capabilities, malware and ransomware prevention, access controls and data protection. We continuously conduct vulnerability assessments to identify new risks and periodically test the efficacy of our safeguards through both internal and external penetration tests. • Education : We provide periodic training for all personnel regarding cybersecurity threats, with such training appropriate to the roles, responsibilities and access of the relevant Company personnel. Our policies require all workers to report any real or suspected cybersecurity events. • Supplier Ecosystem Management : We extend our cybersecurity management control expectations to our supply chain ecosystem, as appropriate. This includes identifying cybersecurity risks presented by third parties. • Incident Response Planning : We have established, and maintain and periodically test, incident response plans that direct our response to cybersecurity events and incidents. Such plans include the protocol by which certain significant or potentially material incidents would be communicated to executive management, our BOD, external regulators and shareholders, as appropriate. • Enterprise-Wide Coordination : We engage relevant stakeholders from across the Company to identify emerging risks and respond to cybersecurity threats. This cross-functional approach includes personnel from our R&D, manufacturing, commercial, technology, legal, compliance, internal audit and other business functions. • Governance : Our BOD’s oversight of cybersecurity risk management is led by the Audit Committee, which oversees our ERM program. Cybersecurity threats, risks and mitigation are periodically reviewed by the Audit Committee and such reviews include both internal and independent assessment of risks, controls and effectiveness. Our risk assessment efforts have indicated that we are a target for theft of intellectual property, financial resources, personal information, and trade secrets from a wide range of actors including nation states, organized crime, malicious insiders and activists. The impacts of attacks, abuse and misuse of Pfizer’s systems and information could include, without limitation, loss of assets, operational disruption and damage to Pfizer’s reputation. A key element of managing cybersecurity risk is the ongoing assessment and testing of our processes and practices through auditing, assessments, drills and other exercises focused on evaluating the sufficiency and effectiveness of our risk mitigation. We regularly engage third parties to perform assessments of our cybersecurity measures, including information security maturity assessments and independent reviews of our information security control environment and operating effectiveness. Certain results of such assessments and reviews are reported by the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) to certain senior leaders, the Audit Committee and the BOD, as appropriate, and we make adjustments to our cybersecurity processes and practices as necessary based on the information provided by the third-party assessments and reviews . The Audit Committee oversees cybersecurity risk management, including the policies, processes and practices that management implements to prevent, detect and address risks from cybersecurity threats. The Audit Committee receives periodic briefings on, and discusses with our CISO, cybersecurity risks and risk management practices, including, for example, recent developments in the external cybersecurity threat landscape, evolving standards, vulnerability assessments, third-party and independent reviews, technological trends and considerations arising from our supplier ecosystem. The Audit Committee may also promptly receive information regarding certain significant or potentially material cybersecurity incidents that may occur, including any ongoing updates regarding the same. Our CISO is a member of our management team who is principally responsible for overseeing our cybersecurity risk management program, in partnership with other business leaders across the Company. We believe our CISO and the information security organization have the appropriate expertise, background and depth of experience relating to monitoring the prevention, mitigation, detection and remediation of cybersecurity incidents to manage risks arising from cybersecurity threats. The CISO works in coordination with other members of the management team, including, among others, the Chief Digital Officer, the Chief Financial Officer and the Chief Legal Officer and their designees. Our CISO, along with leaders from our privacy and corporate compliance functions, collaborate to implement a program designed to manage our exposure to cybersecurity risks and to promptly respond to cybersecurity incidents. Prompt response to incidents is delivered by multi-disciplinary teams in accordance with our incident response plan. Through ongoing communications with these teams during incidents, the CISO monitors the triage, mitigation and remediation of cybersecurity incidents, and reports such incidents to executive management, the Audit Committee and other Pfizer colleagues in accordance with our cybersecurity policies and procedures, as is appropriate. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 26 For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2025 , we are not aware of any cybersecurity incidents that have materially affected or are reasonably likely to materially affect the Company, including our business strategy, results of operations, or financial condition. For further discussion of the risks associated with cybersecurity incidents, see the Item 1A. Risk Factors—Information Techn ology and Cyber s ecurity section in this Form 10-K. ITEM 2. PROPERTIES Our global headquarters are located in New York City. We own and lease space globally for sales and marketing, customer service, regulatory compliance, R&D, manufacturing and distribution and corporate enabling functions. In many locations, our business and operations are co-located to achieve synergy and operational efficiencies. We continue to advance our global workplace strategy to provide workplaces that enable collaboration and foster innovation. As of December 31, 2025, we had 245 owned and leased properties worldwide, amounting to approximately 36 million square feet. As of December 31, 2025, Pfizer Global Supply (PGS) had responsibility for 36 manufacturing plants around the world, which manufacture products for our commercial divisions, including in Belgium, Germany, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Singapore and the U.S. The leadership team for PGS is primarily located in New York City. PGS also operates multiple distribution facilities around the world. PGS continuously evaluates its network and capacity to meet Pfizer's ever-changing needs and help inform future decisions. In the U.S., our R&D facilities contain an aggregate of approximately 7 million square feet, with the majority of that area owned by Pfizer. Outside of the U.S., we lease R&D labs in the U.K., India and Belgium. In general, we believe that our properties, including the principal properties described above, are well-maintained, adequate and suitable for their current requirements and for our operations in the foreseeable future. See Note 9 for amounts invested in land, buildings and equipment. ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS Certain legal proceedings in which we are involved are discussed in Note 16A . INFORMATION ABOUT OUR EXECUTIVE OFFICERS The executive officers of the Company are set forth in this table. Each holds the office or offices indicated until his or her successor is chosen and qualified at the regular meeting of the BOD to be held on the date of the 2026 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, or until his or her earlier death, resignation or removal. Each of the executive officers is a member of the Pfizer Executive Leadership Team. Name Age Position Albert Bourla, DVM, Ph.D. 64 Chairman of the Board since January 2020 and Chief Executive Officer since January 2019. Chief Operating Officer from January 2018 until December 2018. Group President, Pfizer Innovative Health from June 2016 until December 2017. Group President, Global Innovative Pharma Business (responsible for Vaccines, Oncology and Consumer Healthcare since 2014) from February 2016 until June 2016. President and General Manager of Established Products Business Unit from December 2010 until December 2013. Our Director since February 2018. Andrew Baum, MA, BM ChB 55 Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer and Executive Vice President since 2024. Prior to joining Pfizer, he was Head of Global Healthcare - Managing Director Equity Research at Citigroup from 2011 until 2024. Chris Boshoff, MD, FRCP, FMedSci, Ph.D. 62 Chief Scientific Officer and President, Research & Development, since January 2025; Chief Oncology Officer, Executive Vice President from December 2023 until December 2024; Chief Oncology Research and Development Officer and Executive Vice President from July 2023 until December 2023; Senior Vice President, Oncology, from 2017 until 2023. David M. Denton 60 Chief Financial Officer, Executive Vice President since May 2022. Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, Lowe’s Companies, Inc., from November 2018 until April 2022; Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, CVS Health Corporation (a diversified health solutions company), from January 2010 until November 2018. Served as Director of Haleon plc from March 2023 to December 2024. Alexandre de Germay 58 Chief International Commercial Officer, Executive Vice President since December 2023. Chief Executive Officer, Laboratoires Majorelle (a specialty pharma company based in France dedicated to women’s health and urology) from 2021 until January 2024 (assisting with transition matters after December 15, 2023). From 2020 until 2021 was Senior Vice President; Global Franchise Head of Cardiology, Transplant and Established Products, and from 2016 until 2020 was Head of Mature Markets General Medicines of Sanofi. Regional President of Asia-Pacific of Pfizer Inc. from 2013 until 2016. Lidia Fonseca 57 Chief Digital and Technology Officer, Executive Vice President since January 2019. Chief Information Officer and Senior Vice President of Quest Diagnostics Incorporated from 2014 to 2018. Senior Vice President of Laboratory Corporation of America Holdings from 2008 until March 2013. Director of Medtronic plc. Douglas M. Lankler 60 Chief Legal Officer, Executive Vice President since January 2025. General Counsel, Executive Vice President from December 2013 until December 2024. Corporate Secretary from January 2014 until February 2014. Executive Vice President, Chief Compliance and Risk Officer from February 2011 until December 2013. Aamir Malik 50 Chief U.S. Commercial Officer, Executive Vice President since December 2023. Chief Business Innovation Officer, Executive Vice President from August 2021 until December 2023. Various U.S. geographic leadership roles with McKinsey & Company from 2019 to 2021; previously co-led McKinsey & Company’s Global Pharmaceuticals & Medical Products practice from 2015 to 2018. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 27 Name Age Position Michael McDermott 60 Chief Global Supply and Quality Officer, Executive Vice President since January 2025. Chief Global Supply Officer, Executive Vice President from 2022 until December 2024. President of Pfizer Global Supply from 2018 until 2021. Vice President of Pfizer Global Supply from 2014 until 2018. Vice President of the Biotechnology Unit from 2012 until 2014. Payal Sahni 51 Chief People Experience Officer, Executive Vice President since January 2022. Chief Human Resources Officer, Executive Vice President from June 2020 to December 2021. From May 2016 until June 2020 served as Senior Vice President of Human Resources for multiple operating units. Vice President of Human Resources, Vaccines, Oncology & Consumer from 2015 until 2016. Ms. Sahni has served in a number of positions in the Human Resources organization with increasing responsibility since joining Pfizer in 1997. Pfizer Inc. 2025 Form 10-K 28 PART II